



Teen voices on climate change: Fear and resolve; A year after protest, urgency only grows.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 20, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: CURRENTS; Pg. E1
Length: 2080 words
Body


ABSTRACT
A year after protest, urgency only grows.
Sept. 20 marks one year since millions of people took to the streets in what's believed to be the largest-ever climate change protest. The global youth-led protests, started by 17-year-old Greta Thunberg, reached Philadelphia, where thousands of young people left school and work to demand action.
For this anniversary, The Inquirer asked teens in our region - plus one fielding unique issues in Western Pennsylvania - what got them to care about climate change, what scares them, and how they want to see leaders fight back in 2021.
Climate change is a race we're losing.
Tilia Wongcini, 14, is a freshman at Central High School and actions leader for Sunrise South Philly.
We are losing the fight against climate change. Heat waves are worsening, floods and droughts are happening more and more. People are dying, and it will only get worse.
I remember when I really became aware of what climate change was going to do. A few years ago when I was 9 or 10, wildfires were ravaging the West Coast, where most of my family lives. I heard my dad talking to relatives on the phone about how they weren't leaving the house, and had to wear masks. That isn't as bad as other things people have had to do to adapt to climate change, but it made me realize people were having to change their way of life.
Now today, I am hearing about wildfires again. Only this time they're scarier. It makes me feel angry and hopeless. It makes it clear we are losing this fight. These fires are a preview for something worse.
This year I started a South Philly hub for the youthled Sunrise Movement with a few of my classmates. We created this hub to fight issues specific to South Philly, such as the LNG plant and oil refinery. Many people who live in South Philly are working-class people of color, who are especially affected by pollution and related problems. Often, when we win against climate change, that helps in other issues too, like public health. We need leaders from the communities that are directly affected.
People seem to think climate change is really far away, but obviously it's not. Some think we can put off dealing with it, but we clearly can't. We need drastic change soon.
For one thing, we need a Green New Deal - which is not just one bill or legislation, or just one fight. Its goals are to reach net zero emissions, and to create millions of good jobs. Important elements include securing the rights of workers while transitioning to more sustainable energy sources and trying to fix systemic oppression against marginalized groups. Governments also have to prepare for a lot of climate displacement, and make it easier for people in places severely affected by climate change to move someplace safer. Millions of people will be displaced from their homes.
To win the fight against climate change we need people to realize the urgency of our situation, and work toward solutions that may be inconvenient, or even radical - but are necessary for survival.
Climate change is why I'm leaving Pittsburgh.
Steven Labalme, 18, is a first-year at the University of Chicago.
Two generations of men in my family have come to Pittsburgh as healthy kids without trouble breathing and left the city with asthma. I'm one of them: the kid who's had an inhaler in his hockey bag for years. I'm heading off to college, and while I'll return to Pittsburgh over breaks, I can't justify moving back to the city I've called home.
I suppose it's no surprise I was diagnosed with asthma in fourth grade - Pennsylvania's asthma rate recently ranked third highest in the nation. In some neighborhoods in Allegheny County, the asthma rate is nearly triple the national average.
Ozone smog is to blame for our skyhigh asthma rates, with abnormally warm temperatures making things worse. As the climate crisis intensifies, we need strong action from Pennsylvania's elected officials to protect our health and cut pollution.
A great place to start is with methane, a greenhouse gas 84 times more potent than carbon that's responsible for 25% of man-made global warming.
Although Gov. Tom Wolf has proposed a rule to tackle this pressing issue, it exempts low-producing wells, which are responsible for more than half of the methane emissions from oil and gas sources in Pennsylvania. To truly address the problem, the governor and the Department of Environmental Protection must close this loophole.
Additionally, since methane is natural gas, leaking methane is actually a salable product, a third of which can be captured and sold at no net cost to the industry. There is no reason to continue debating closing the low-producing-well loophole and enacting this cost-effective, impactful rule-making. Let's go.
Despite the importance of methane leaks, we can also ill afford to ignore carbon pollution. A common antiregulatory rallying cry is "Regulations disrupt the free market." But that talking point actually makes the case for Pennsylvania to join the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative. RGGI, which sets pollution caps for power plants and auctions emissions permits around those limits, creates a market force that incentivizes companies to find the most cost-effective ways to reduce pollution.
Pennsylvania has already begun tackling greenhouse gas emissions. I was happy to see Gov. Wolf take a first step by signing an executive order in January 2019 to reduce greenhouse gas pollution by 26% by 2025 and by 80% by 2050. But this is not nearly enough. Gov. Wolf must do more, and the rest of Pennsylvania's elected officials are obliged to listen to the 79% of Pennsylvanians who support strict rules on carbon emissions.
Absent real climate action, young people who value clear skies and healthy air will not want to move here. Pennsylvania will face a "brain drain" of its own as natives like me follow suit.
There are a lot of reasons to move to Pittsburgh, including its culture, technology, and rapidly developing eds-and-meds sector. But I can't afford to come back if Pennsylvania doesn't fix its air-pollution problem. Two generations of men in my family have come to Pittsburgh as kids without asthma and left Pittsburgh with asthma. When starting my own family, I won't make it three.
Climate change is violence against our future.
Nia Peterson, 18, is a freshman at the University of Pennsylvania and graduate of the Mighty Writers Teen Scholars program.
I learned from an early age that climate change is urgent. Throughout high school I surrounded myself with peers who used social media to debunk arguments against global warming and promote small changes people can make to protect our environment. I grew up seeing people limit their trash to tiny jars and use hashtags about saving turtles, learning from my scientific hero, Bill Nye, that how we treat our planet has dire consequences.
My first reaction was to accept this as fact and find ways to help. It seemed intuitive - how could fracking and air pollution and deforestation not bring this world one step closer to being uninhabitable? So I was upset to see wars waged over the legitimacy of something like climate change. I could not understand ignoring scientists, who dedicate their lives to evidence and research.
The divide among the public about who and what to believe has only strengthened my viewpoint, and convinced me more people need to change the way they understand and treat our land. The way I view it, I inherited this land from my ancestors, but it is not mine. While "owning" it, I am simultaneously borrowing it from the people who come after me. I want to provide for them what I wish I had received.
Due to ignorance and selfishness, my predecessors created the perfect environment for wildfires to spread and tropical storms to grow. Now when it rains, it pours, and does so for much longer bouts of time. We have the knowledge and resources we need to combat and prevent this violence from growing uncontrollably, but we are instead busy picking sides.
While humans are at war with each other, we forget that the planet is at war with us. The violence we create among ourselves thus receives a backdrop of natural disasters in the news, only adding to the chaos. My concern is that with this war against the Earth, the odds are not in our favor.
To provide ourselves and our futures a fighting chance, we first need to acknowledge the situation. We need leaders ready and willing to speak on the matter, in every sector of society - brave enough to reevaluate systems, like transportation's dependence on fossil fuels, that change our climate. We need more people who prioritize sustainability and preservation in their fields, because that ultimately equals prioritizing human life. We need more people in positions of power to have a conservation mind-set, and see the value in passing down our land in a better condition than how we received it. With the intellect, technology, and resources we have, I see no reason to expect anything less from the people meant to lead us. It is so important that they work on uniting our attention toward this common threat, because divided is how we fall.
I am not worried about the Earth itself; our planet will surely overcome the changes that we are inducing. I am more worried that we are much less capable of overcoming the consequences of our own actions.
Climate change is more proof of local and global inequality.
Anna Wetzel, 16, is a junior at the Baldwin School in Bryn Mawr.
My first apocalyptic experience with climate change was in my country of origin, Argentina. Along the Andes and throughout the grasslands, unprecedented thunderstorms - linked by meteorologists to climate change - have ravaged small towns and the financial futures of those living on the Pampa [a province in central Argentina]. While industrial superpowers are responsible for the vast majority of greenhouse gas emissions, nations and communities who contribute the least to the acceleration of climate change, such as farmers of the Pampa, bear the devastating brunt.
The inequitable distribution of climate instability is not arbitrary, but a symptom of inequalities that permeate every level of society. One August afternoon, as I was walking back from a rally for Black Lives that ended in Philadelphia, I witnessed this inequality firsthand. As I made my urban trek from Bala Cynwyd to Overbrook, the landscape evolved from green, shaded suburbia to paved city blocks, and the temperature increased as well. Geographically, a mere three miles distances Overbrook from Bala Cynwyd; the true distance, however, is between the disparate experiences of those living in the predominantly Black neighborhood of Overbrook vs. the predominately white Bala Cynwyd.
Environmental racism follows a similar pattern as international climate instability. The communities that contribute the least to global warming - largely Black communities and other communities of color - have been intentionally placed in neighborhoods most vulnerable to its effects. Climate change exposes American habits of segregation: of race and of wealth. Further exacerbating these divisions, American consumerism's appropriation of environmental sustainability has placed responsibility on individual lifestyle adaptations, rather than radical, systemic change. Instead of improving systems of public transportation, hybrid cars are manufactured and marketed to the well-off and supposedly well-intentioned.
I fear the commercialization of climate justice has allowed the privileged to isolate themselves from the effects of climate disaster, rather than direct wealth toward inclusive, community-centered responses. Such responses have been central to marginalized communities for decades. Principles of frugality adopted by disenfranchised communities can in fact be radical examples of sustainability. The sharing of resources - such as neighborhood potlucks, hand-me-down clothing, multigenerational households - is also the conservation of resources, both financial and ecological.
Walking into my family's own Hispanic household, you are greeted by "imposturous" storage: a used jar of Dulce de Leche moonlighting as a container of leftover rice, a collection of loose needles and threads disguised as a tin of cookies, shelves lined with glasses that used to hold quince marmalade. Environmental sustainability means sustaining heritage, sustaining culture, and sustaining community. We cannot be expected to heal our planet until we mend the inequalities that divide us.

Load-Date: September 20, 2020


End of Documen
t



Climate change should concern pro-lifers
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 21, 2020 Monday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A11
Length: 533 words
Byline: Richard Whiteford
Body


Toddlers will melt your heart with their innocence, trust, and wide-eyed wonderment. Their mischievous curiosity and determination to sit, stand, crawl, walk, run, talk, and read rouses us to wonder what great contributions they will make to humanity when they're grown. One can see why prolife supporters oppose abortion.
A vexing question is, where's the fierce opposition from "pro-life, sanctity of life people" to political policies that jeopardize today's toddlers' futures once they're outside the womb? A large majority of pro-lifers vote for the political party whose policies support forprofit wars, assault weapon ownership, foster environmental degradation, and deny climate change.
Out of the above policies, the most formidable threat to our children's futures, along with the rest of humanity, is climate change.
Climate change is causing massive hurricanes, torrential rain events, derecho windstorms, and tornadoes that devastate communities and agricultural areas and displacing millions of people. Drought-induced wildfires have ravaged huge areas of Australia, California, and other areas around the world. All of this is happening now, and climate change is just getting started.
Humans, on average, pump around 110 million tons of CO2 into the atmosphere every 24 hours. At the beginning of the industrial revolution, CO2 was ~280 parts per million (PPM) in the atmosphere. Now it is ~410 PPM.
The heating planet is melting icebergs around the world. A report from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) shows that between 2014 and 2018, one trillion tons of ice melted. That's enough water to fill a pool the size of New York state 23 feet deep. Now, the Thwaites glacier in Antarctica is rapidly melting, guaranteeing an additional two feet of sea-level rise. The Thwaites is only one out of 198,000 other glaciers around the world that may eventually melt, adding to sea-level rise.
The United Nations released a report in 2018 compiled by 91 climate scientists from 40 countries that gave this stern warning: We must cut CO2 emissions in half by 2030 and eliminate them entirely by 2050 to assure human survival.
Two years have passed, and we've done absolutely nothing meaningful to achieve that goal. In fact, according to a U.N. Emissions Gap Report, world governments are planning to produce 50% more fossil fuels by 2030 than would be consistent with keeping the global temperature within the established 1.5-degree temperature limit.
Additionally, the Trump administration is working fast and hard to promote fossil fuels, making it impossible to reach that goal. Not only are they condemning American citizens, they're sealing the fate of all life to an uninhabitable planet.
So, how old will today's toddlers be in 2050 when, if we fail to cut carbon emissions to zero, they'll have to try to survive in a hostile atmosphere? Are any of them your children or grandchildren?
If your pro-life beliefs are that important to you, how hard will you fight to get our government to cut CO2 emissions to zero by 2050 in order to preserve today's toddlers' sanctity of life?
Richard Whiteford is an independent journalist and a climate change consultant and educator.

Load-Date: September 21, 2020


End of Documen
t



Conservatives, but green, too; They back free-market answers but agree that the problem is climate change caused by people.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
July 5, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A3
Length: 979 words
Byline: Frank Kummer STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
They back free-market answers but agree that the problem is climate change caused by people.
Karly Matthews, who graduated from Temple University last month with a degree in journalism, has always identified as conservative, but like most of her Gen Z peers, she also cares about the environment.
"As I got into college and got more politically active, it did honestly really bother me that [other conservatives] didn't talk about environmental issues when it's such a pressing topic," Matthews said.
So she took a job with the American Conservation Coalition Campus, a nonprofit group of conservatives that acknowledges climate change is real and caused by human activity, and embraces environmental causes. But unlike more liberal environmental organizations, the group's approach also states that natural gas and nuclear energy should be part of a climate plan.
ACC Campus has chapters at 220 colleges, including Temple.
The organization was started by Benji Backer, who graduated this year from the University of Washington with a degree in marketing, and supports free-market solutions to climate change, chiefly through technological innovation. He noted that the Environmental Protection Agency was created under Republican President Richard M. Nixon and that conservatives including President Theodore Roosevelt long embraced environmental issues.
For younger conservatives, he said, there is no "disbelief" that humans are having an impact on the climate.
"We're trying to fix the generational divide," Backer said last week.
"The only solutions that have been proposed are ones that are, you know, very left to center," Backer said. "But it also falls on the right to come up with solutions."
In mid-June, ACC Campus launched a weeklong ad run on Fox News to nudge the Trump administration and Congress to make "conservation and energy innovation a critical part of any post-COVID-19 recovery package."
A recent Pew Research Center report shows millennial and Gen Z Republicans, ages 18 to 39, have differing opinions from older Republicans on key issues related to climate, environmental protection, and energy production.
Younger Republicans are more likely than older ones to believe human activity is a cause of climate change. A bigger share of younger Republicans believes the government is doing too little to protect water and air quality, animal habitats, and open lands in national parks. And younger Republicans are also more apt than older ones to say the nation should prioritize developing alternative energy sources over expanding the production of fossil fuels.
"The environment is something that I have felt passionately about since my youth," Backer said. "I grew up going to a really tranquil lake in the Northwest, in Wisconsin. I moved to Seattle for school because I wanted to be somewhere where I could hike because the environment is really where I feel the best."
Backer, who has referred to himself as a "Never Trump" conservative, said he found it frustrating talking to conservatives about environmental issues. So he started ACC Campus and aims for bipartisanship. He said conservatives skeptical about climate change often change their minds when told there might be free-market solutions.
"For us in terms of energy, that can mean any technology within any industry that helps reduce emissions," Backer said. "And that could be wind and solar. ... We realize that, especially in certain states including Pennsylvania, fossil fuels are an important part of the economy, and that's not going to change overnight."
ACC Campus has a climate contract that calls for innovation in energy and new infrastructure while acknowledging an "undeniable link between human activity, particularly greenhouse gas emissions, and climate change."
Natural gas produces far less carbon dioxide, the chief greenhouse gas, than coal-fired power plants do. But most environmentalists are critical of pipelines and the chemicals used in fracking. They also are concerned about methane, a greenhouse gas that can leak during operations.
On Tuesday, House Democrats unveiled a sweeping climate action plan that calls for net-zero carbon emissions by 2050. The plan does not explicitly call for an end to fracking, but it does call for cutting methane pollution emitted during the process. It also recommends "next generation nuclear" and carbon capture technology.
ACC Campus is affiliated with the American Conservation Coalition, whose advisory board includes representatives of high-profile environmental groups, such as the Audubon Society, but also includes others with past affiliations to climate-denial groups. Backer said those board members now acknowledge the impact humans have on climate change.
Matthews, the Temple grad, joined ACC Campus in 2018 and has "always identified myself as right of center."
"I think a lot of times, especially with young conservatives, it's not that we don't care about the environment. But we're kind of in this place where we think there's a choice between economic prosperity and addressing environmental concerns like climate change."
She said hearing there could be a link between economics and conservation "was a lightbulb moment for me."
Matthews, who is not a supporter of President Donald Trump or Joe Biden, said conservatives are responsive to that message.
Divya Jain, a senior chemistry major at Pennsylvania State University, is co-president of the campus group Eco Action and said "it's absolutely great" that ACC Campus recognizes climate change. But she is not a supporter of natural gas as part of a clean climate plan.
Nevertheless, she said there's a role for conservatives in the overall discussion on climate change.
"Climate change will impact not just Democrats, but also Republicans," Jain said. "So it's important to get people on both sides of the aisle on board." fkummer@inquirer.com
215-854-2329 FrankKummer

Load-Date: July 5, 2020


End of Documen
t



Pa. chicken farming may rise due to climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
April 21, 2020 Tuesday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 780 words
Byline: Frank Kummer STAFF WRITER
Body


Pennsylvania released an updated climate assessment report Monday showing that a continuing rise in temperatures and rainfall could affect everything from the number of chickens farmed to water quality.
The first climate assessment for the state was issued in 2009, with updates in 2013 and 2015. Those reports examined the effects of climate change on agriculture, energy, forests, human health, outdoor recreation, water, and aquatic resources.
The 2015 report showed a 2-degree rise in average temperature, a 10% increase in average annual rainfall, and more extreme precipitation overall since 1901.
The latest report narrows its focus to the projected effects of climate change on livestock, infrastructure, and water quality. The goal is to help communities and businesses plan.
The data were analyzed for the state Department of Environmental Protection by the Pennsylvania State University Environment and Natural Resources Institute.
Pa.'s changing climate
Using federal data, the Penn State scientists projected that all 67 counties will continue to experience warmer and wetter weather. Using a baseline year of 2000, average rainfall and extreme precipitation are expected to increase by 8% to 12%, especially in winter and spring, through the mid-century, defined as between 2041 and 2070. In that same projection, the average temperature is expected to rise at least 2.7 degrees Fahrenheit.
The projections assume greenhouse gas emissions continue to grow at a high rate throughout the 21st century. If the rate of emissions slows, projected climate change would be less. Scientists attribute the rise to climate change caused by the burning of fossil fuels since the late 1800s.
"Effective decision-making for Pennsylvania's future is decision-making that accounts for the changes that are likely to happen if we don't reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and meets the need to manage them," DEP Secretary Patrick McDonnell said in a statement.
Gov. Tom Wolf has set a statewide goal of lowering greenhouse gas emissions 80% by 2050.
Changes to livestock farming
The report says dairy, beef, and livestock production is intrinsically linked with climate, since they are dependent on the weather for success, though most poultry and hog production takes place indoors. But indoor facilities have to be heated and cooled, for example, and animals feed on grains that can change in price because of weather and disease.
Those increased costs associated with raising livestock in warmer weather in southern states could stimulate a movement north, the authors state. As a result, Pennsylvania's poultry inventory could double in size.
Small increases are likely in beef cattle and hog and pig inventories. The dairy cattle inventory is anticipated to remain roughly the same, though where dairy cattle operations take place could change within the commonwealth.
Water quality issues
In addition, large-scale livestock farming also produces large amounts of manure, creating high concentrations of nitrogen and phosphorus, a source of pollution. Any possible increase in that livestock means a greater need for stormwater management to keep the pollutants out of waterways.
Projections for nitrogen and phosphorus from animal manure show increases through 2050 due to climate change. Those changes could produce excess nutrients in waterways, especially in the Susquehanna and Delaware River watersheds.
The Susquehanna is the biggest tributary to the Chesapeake Bay, and Pennsylvania is required to meet water quality goals that reduce the daily pollution load on the bay.
The state has already experienced issues trying to meet those goals, and increased loads in the two nutrients could make that even more difficult.
Threats to infrastructure
Localized intense flooding poses the biggest potential stress on Pennsylvania's infrastructure for energy, transportation, and water.
The report found no evidence that changes in climate over several decades have made flood situations more common among major waterways. But the damages from flooding have risen because of increased population. That suggests more potential for flooding among smaller waterways that have not seen issues in the past because surrounding areas had been undeveloped.
Patterns of rainfall analyzed by the authors suggest flooding is likely to increase in frequency overall, and possibly in severity, in the coming decades as climate changes.
Heavy precipitation can lead to an increased risk of landslides because of the state's topography, especially in Southwestern Pennsylvania. Many roads and rail lines follow contours carved out by rivers, so landslides could pose a threat. fkummer@inquirer.com
215-854-2329
FrankKummer

Load-Date: April 21, 2020


End of Documen
t



A frightening future for butterflies; Climate change and its effects have put monarchs at risk of extinction
The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 12, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL WEEKLY; Pg. K17
Length: 746 words
Byline: BY KEVIN SIEFF in Rosario, Mexico
Body


ABSTRACT
Climate change and its effects have put monarchs at risk of extinction
No one knows when millions of monarch butterflies began crisscrossing North America, spending their winters clustered on the same hillsides in Central Mexico, a blaze of orange wings in the green forest.
But over the centuries, they were mythologized by generations of humans. Locals believed they carried the souls of their ancestors. Scientists saw the migration as the proof of insect evolution - a brittle organism that could fly 6,000 miles a year to avoid severe weather.
Now, the monarch has morphed into a different kind of symbol. One of the world's oldest, most resilient species could be decimated - and soon - by climate change.
The butterflies are among the world's experts in climate adaptation. They spend their summers in the northern United States and Canada; they breed in the southern United States during the fall and spring; and most spend their winters here in Central Mexico.
Their life cycles are driven by a search for optimal conditions: temperatures ideally between 55 and the low 70s when they migrate, some rain during their winters and plenty of milkweed when they mate. The criteria are narrow - and dependent on relatively consistent weather patterns.
That consistency no longer exists.
Now summer temperatures in the Midwest are soaring. The milkweed in Texas is drying up. Winter storms, once rare, are snaking through central Mexico regularly as air warms over the Pacific Ocean and blows across the region.
"The question we're asking is 'Can one of the world's most adaptive insects adapt to climate change?'" asked Karen Oberhauser, who studies the species at the University of Wisconsin. "We are changing the conditions and just waiting to see."
While almost all species could eventually be consumed by a changing climate and habitat loss, few are as likely to vanish as abruptly as the monarch.
Between 1990 and 2015, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service says, a billion butterflies vanished.
Because over 95 percent of the population migrates en masse to a few patches of Mexican forest, each smaller than half a football field, a single storm or heat stroke could effectively kill off the population.
That nearly happened in 2002, when a winter storm killed about 75 percent of monarchs. And again in 2012, when a heat wave in the Midwest killed tens of thousands.
"At every stage in their migration, they are threatened by climate change," said Eduardo Rendón, the monarch butterfly coordinator for the World Wildlife Fund in Mexico.
Each time, they rebounded - but barely. Last year, the population grew when a cold front in North Texas forced butterflies to stay in South Texas for longer than usual, increasing the length of their breeding season.
But this past year brought another scare, as temperatures in Oklahoma and Kansas soared as monarchs passed through. It was the second hottest September in 125 years in those states. The impact on the population has not yet been calculated.
"If you're talking 20, 30, 40 years out, we're not going to be talking about monarchs anymore," said Chip Taylor, the founder of Monarch Watch and a professor at the University of Kansas.
The United Nations reported this year that 1 million species of plants and animals face possible extinction "within decades" - due in large part to climate change. The monarch is among them. American scientists spent more than a century trying to find the population in Mexico. A National Geographic headline celebrated their discovery by the Canadian zoologist Fred Urquhart in August 1976: "Discovered: The Monarch's Mexican Haven."
Yet the people of Rosario had seen the butterflies land here for centuries. It was their own private spectacle, remote enough that no Americans had located it. Pre-Hispanic pottery has been found with images of butterflies.
"Our grandparents told us, 'Take care of them. They're angels,'" said Homero Gomez González, the former commissioner of Rosario.
He remembers the mid-1970s, when the American scientists started to arrive. And then, soon after, the American tourists.
"We came to believe that the tourism could be good for us," he said.
González and other local leaders tried to restore the forest that had been badly damaged by illegal logging, which in turn displaced clusters of butterflies.
That restoration has largely been successful. But now climate change poses a greater threat.
"The migration will disappear unless we solve climate change," Taylor said.

Load-Date: January 12, 2020


End of Documen
t



Mosquitos get more biting days; Climate change gives them added time when heat is to their liking.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
August 4, 2020 Tuesday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: THE REGION; Pg. B1
Length: 864 words
Byline: Frank Kummer STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
Climate change gives them added time when heat is to their liking.
Mosquitoes in Philly and elsewhere are feasting on flesh earlier in the summer season and also prompting thigh-slapping swats later in the year, new data suggest.
In some areas of Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware, mosquitoes are around weeks longer than in previous decades because of the changing climate, according to Climate Central.
The nonprofit group of scientists and journalists calculated the number of mosquito-friendly days in the Philadelphia region and found they are growing.
The insect survives best at temperatures between 50 and 95 degrees Fahrenheit with relative humidity of 42% or more, according to studies by the National Institutes of Health. Climate Central analyzed weather data from 1979 on, and filtered for days meeting those conditions.
Philadelphia went from 153 such days in the 1980s to 163 in the 2010s, according to the data. Allentown went from 128 to 142. And Atlantic City went from 142 to 155.
State College, Pa., has seen nearly a month of additional mosquito-friendly days.
Climate Central found the number of mosquito days has increased in 64% of the 239 U.S. locations it examined for the two periods, 1980-89 and 2010-19. The biggest increases were in the Northeast, Pacific Coast, and Ohio Valley.
The average temperature in July for Philadelphia was 81.9 degrees, which is 3.8 degrees above normal. It was Philadelphia's third-hottest July since the government began keeping score in 1871 and tied a record for 90-plus temperatures.
And it's part of a trend. Philly's average summer temperature has risen about 2.8 degrees from 1970 to 2019, according to another analysis by Climate Central.
But even mosquitoes have their limits. The South is seeing fewer mosquito-friendly days because it is getting too hot in some locations for the insects to thrive, according to the Climate Central analysis.
The data also suggest that more weather conducive to mosquitoes' survival means an increased risk of diseases they transmit, such as West Nile virus.
West Nile is the leading cause of mosquito-borne disease in the United States, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The mosquitoes get infected from feeding on birds carrying the disease, then transmit it to humans.
Though there are no vaccines to prevent the disease or medications to treat it, most of those infected do not feel sick. Those who do can develop a fever. The disease does prove serious or fatal in about 1 out of 150 cases.
Matt Helwig, a West Nile specialist for the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, cautioned that more mosquitoes doesn't automatically translate into more cases of the disease.
For example, Helwig said, 2018 saw a big outbreak of the disease. But 2019 and, so far, 2020, have proven minimal for West Nile, because birds that transmit the virus to mosquitoes developed an immunity after that outbreak. Only one probable human case has been reported this year in Pennsylvania.
"It's going to take a bit of time to ramp back up," Helwig said.
The DEP has detected West Nile virus-infected mosquitoes in five counties. Non-human infections have been reported in New Jersey as well. None have been reported in Delaware.
The Asian tiger mosquito,
Aedes aegypti, poses another concern. The invasive species is an aggressive biter that's pushed north into Pennsylvania as the weather has become warmer. The mosquito is more typically found in tropical areas, such as South America, Central America, and Southeast Asia and can carry the Zika virus.
The chances of Zika transmission are likely lower now because of the coronavirus pandemic, Helwig said. That's because most Zika cases in the U.S. occur when a mosquito bites a traveler infected in another country, and the pandemic has canceled most travel. So far, no local transmissions have occurred in Pennsylvania.
Nate Wardle, a spokesperson for the state Department of Health, said that warmer temperatures also mean other pests that pose a danger to human health can thrive.
He said the blacklegged tick (deer tick) that transmits Lyme disease has begun to survive in the winter months due to milder weather. And the Lone Star tick, once confined to the South, is now present in Pennsylvania. It can cause ehrlichiosis and alphagal allergy, a severe immune response that affects people after they have eaten red meat.
Though mosquitoes can bite at any time, they are most active at dawn and dusk. Experts recommend that people use a repellent containing DEET, cover exposed skin with lightweight clothing, and make sure window screens are in good condition.
The mosquitoes that transmit West Nile breed in areas with standing and stagnant water, such as catch basins, clogged gutters, old tires, poorly maintained swimming pools, bird baths, flower pots and other types of containers. Any of these located near your home should be eliminated.
Where that's not possible, officials recommend treatment with Bti products, sold at most home improvement stores. Bti is a natural product that kills mosquito larvae but is safe for people, pets, aquatic life and plants. fkummer@inquirer.com
215-854-2329
FrankKummer

Load-Date: August 4, 2020


End of Documen
t



$20M fund to mitigate climate change; Exelon and its foundation will fund start-ups working to develop technologies to combat climate change in its six urban markets.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 26, 2019 Thursday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. A13
Length: 417 words
Byline: Andrew Maykuth STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
Exelon and its foundation will fund start-ups working to develop technologies to combat climate change in its six urban markets.
Exelon Corp. and its foundation on Wednesday launched a $20 million initiative to fund start-ups working on new technologies to mitigate climate change in the six urban markets where Exelon operates utilities, including Philadelphia, Atlantic City, and Wilmington.
The Exelon Foundation will contribute $10 million over the next 10 years to fund the Climate Change Investment Initiative, which will focus on clean energy and environmental technologies that have a potential for wide-scale commercialization. Exelon Corp. will match the grants with up to $10 million of in-kind investment of services, including advice on developing business plans and accessing capital.
Exelon, which reported $2.1 billion in profits last year, announced the initiative Wednesday at a clean-energy forum hosted by the Climate Group as part of Climate Week NYC, which is held annually in conjunction with the United Nations.
Innovations must have the potential to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions; boost the resilience of urban infrastructure against flood, stormwater, and rising temperatures; help cities, business, and communities adapt to climate change; or achieve a state or city's specific sustainability and climate goals.
Minority and women-owned businesses will receive "particular consideration," the company said. Applications can be submitted online at www.exelonfoundation.org.
The initiatives also benefit areas where Exelon operates local utilities: Atlantic City, Baltimore, Chicago, Philadelphia, Washington, and Wilmington. The company's utilities include Atlantic City Electric, Peco, and Delmarva Power.
Exelon moved about a decade ago to divest much of its fossil-fuel power generation, and to concentrate on carbonfree nuclear. But the Chicago-based company's efforts to push public policies that favor zero-carbon generation have been mixed: It was unable to persuade the federal government to embrace a tax on carbon, and on Friday, it prematurely retired its Three Mile Island nuclear power plant near Harrisburg after failing to convince Pennsylvania policymakers to approve a rescue for the state's nuclear fleet.
Exelon's utilities in the Philadelphia area do not produce power themselves; rather, they are strictly distribution companies that purchase power on wholesale markets from producers, including Exelon Generation. amaykuth@inquirer.com
215-854-2947
Maykuth

Load-Date: September 26, 2019


End of Documen
t



Parks losing battle to climate change; 'Severely hotter and drier conditions than the U.S. as a whole,' face Yosemite, Grand Canyon, others
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 30, 2018 Sunday


Copyright 2018 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL WEEKLY; Pg. K9
Length: 882 words
Byline: BY ALEX HORTON
Body


ABSTRACT
'Severely hotter and drier conditions than the U.S. as a whole,' face Yosemite, Grand Canyon, others
By 2100, visitors walking the grounds of California's Joshua Tree National Park may view exhibits showing what will have been lost - the spiky yucca palms that inspired the park's name, dwindled to a few rare husks.
Climate change could kill most of the park's iconic trees, wildfires may transform the towering conifer forests at Yellowstone National Park into scarred grasslands, and once-mighty ice sheets in the north will probably melt and flow into the sea, making Glacier National Park both an obsolete name and a hard lesson about environmental degradation.
A study published last week has warned that climate change has adversely and uniquely affected many of the 417 national parks spread across the United States and its territories, according to scientists from the University of California at Berkeley and University of Wisconsin.
"Human-caused climate change exposes the U.S. national parks to severely hotter and drier conditions than the U.S. as a whole," Patrick Gonzalez, a climate scientist at Berkeley and a lead author of the study, told The Washington Post on Tuesday.
The consequences are alarming, the study suggests. Some of the most sacred and ecologically sensitive areas in the country, from the Grand Canyon to Yosemite and Denali, may decay into ghosts of their former mighty selves and be unrecognizable to future generations.
Researchers looked at data between 1895 and 2010 and concluded temperatures in national parks increased twice as much compared with other parts of the country, while precipitation fell dramatically at those parks.
That is because parks are often in places sensitive to shifts in climate. Many parks are at high elevation, where the Earth warms quickly due to a thinner atmosphere, researchers said. Alaska is severely affected because melting snow uncovers darker surfaces that absorb heat.
Alaska is also where 63 percent of all national park area is located, the study says.
In the Southwest, rising temperatures coupled with droughts have ravaged the region, where many other parks are found.
It is vital to defend national parks, which make up 4 percent of U.S. land, researchers said, because the protective measures mean national parks are becoming even more important sanctuaries for plants and animals. And the parks hold vast amounts of watersheds to replenish drinking water, along with trees to soak up carbon.
Two centuries of burning fossil fuels have produced twice as much carbon that can be absorbed by forests and oceans, and excess carbon in the atmosphere has reflected sunlight back to the Earth, Gonzalez said. It is a natural process, but human activity has helped add carbon dioxide to the atmosphere at levels not seen for 800,000 years, he said.
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions is the best way to reduce climate impact at the parks, the researchers said.
The National Park Service said it relies on studies, such as the newest one, to inform policy, in which climate change is one factor among others in its decision-making.
"It is our job to understand and know how to manage effects from a changing climate so that we may protect park resources, just as we manage the impacts of invasive species or erosion or wildfire," said Jeremy Barnum, an agency spokesman, in a statement Tuesday.
The agency said the study describes natural events that take place "outside the climate change conversation," such as wildfires caused by humans.
But the effects of climate change on national parks are clear and documented, the researchers said.
Jack Williams, a climate researcher at the University of Wisconsin, told The Washington Post that Glacier National Park in Montana, which draws admirers for its snowy peaks and mirror-like lakes, may lose its namesake because of rising temperatures and glaciers already in retreat.
Further north, in Alaska's Glacier Bay, the once enormous Muir Glacier has melted hundreds of meters from the 1950s to 2010.
At Yellowstone, drought and wildfires have thinned towering forests, and scientific projections point to fires that burn more frequently. It could turn the region into rolling grasslands, Williams said.
Wildfires are naturally occurring and typically ideal for forests to clear underbrush, researchers said, but arid conditions and federal policies to stamp out fires has translated to drier and denser kindling that make fires more intense.
Gonzalez, who is also the principal climate scientist for the National Park Service but spoke about his research in his capacity at Berkeley, said Yellowstone faces another threat connected to human activity.
The winter cold used to kill bark beetles. But warmer seasons have extended the life of these insects, which can feast on trees longer and in greater numbers. The transforming ecosystem there may also force the iconic bison and other animals away from familiar grounds, researchers said.
The researchers pointed to some solutions already underway.
Gonzalez said the agency has made efforts to identify particularly vulnerable areas in parks, along with a focus to protect areas where life may be able to take shelter and thrive in good local conditions. The parks have also focused on reducing emissions, he said.
©The Washington Post

Load-Date: October 1, 2018


End of Documen
t



Climate change puts parks at risk; Natural preserves may lose distinctive features.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
July 2, 2006 Sunday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 1607 words
Byline: Paul Nussbaum, Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


Global warming is erasing the glaciers from Glacier National Park and the Joshua trees from Joshua Tree National Park, and may turn the Everglades into the Neverglades.
Many national parks, created as preserves of the best or the most or the last, are especially vulnerable to climate change. Already-fragile park environments are often at special risk because of their location at high elevations and latitudes or along coasts.
Faced with this threat, unimagined when it was created in 1916, the National Park Service will be hard-pressed to meet its legal obligation to conserve the parks' natural and historic wonders "unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations."
"At some parks, you might lose the key species that Congress intended to be protected," said Michael Soukup, associate director of the Park Service for natural resource stewardship and science in Washington. "We've been looking at this for a number of years, and we're starting to look at it much more seriously."
"Managers will have choices to make, where to put their money and what to do," said Leigh Welling, director of the Park Service's Crown of the Continent Research Learning Center at Glacier National Park, Mont., and national coordinator of the Park Service's 17 research centers. "We want to promote informed decisions... . The public has to be involved in answering the question: 'What do you want to save?' "
A changing climate will affect the parks' animals, plants, landscapes, historic artifacts and visitors. Uncertainties abound about exactly how individual parks will be reshaped by global warming, but park scientists say change is inevitable.
Among the chief concerns:
Habitat loss. Warming climates will force animals and plants to move uphill or northward in search of hospitable homes. From the Great Smoky Mountains to Rocky Mountain to Yellowstone to Denali, those at the limits of their range or unable to move quickly enough will vanish from the parks.
Rising sea levels. By 2025, sea levels in the Chesapeake Bay area are projected to have risen by eight inches and in south Florida by five inches. By 2100, south Florida seas are predicted to be 20 inches higher. Many coastal parks, such as Everglades, Assateague, Cape Cod, Fire Island and Biscayne will see more erosion and flooding, and salt water will invade freshwater marshes, changing the nature of the parks and their inhabitants. Rising water can also jeopardize low-lying historical sites such as Jamestown in Virginia and Jean Lafitte National Historical Park near New Orleans.
Precipitation changes. Parks will become wetter or drier, depending on location, and moisture may arrive as rain, rather than snow, altering local water cycles. Different plants and animals will thrive. Forest fires will likely occur more frequently in drier parks, such as Yellowstone, Rocky Mountain, and Glacier.
Changing migration patterns. Migrating birds appear to be arriving and nesting earlier in some parks as the climate warms. If their patterns fall out of synch with the insects on which they feed, they and their fledglings may not survive.
"Climate change is the greatest single threat to our national parks," said Stephen Saunders, a former Interior Department official in charge of fish, wildlife and parks during the Clinton administration. "There will be changes in nearly every national park unit, and in some, they will be huge and sweeping and profound."
Saunders is now president of the Rocky Mountain Climate Organization and is cowriting, with the Natural Resources Defense Council, a report on the effects of climate change on national parks in the western United States.
More than 270 million people a year visit the nation's 390 national parks, and some park managers are taking the opportunity to inform Americans about global warming, though not as aggressively as critics would like.
"We're not pushing any political message; we're not telling visitors to call their senators or representatives," said Shawn Norton, director of a Park Service program to make parks more "climate friendly" and the public more aware of the effects of climate change. "Advocacy is a fine line to walk... our responsibility lies in making sure visitors understand the impacts and what they can do."
"We're a very small agency with a potentially high impact," said Soukup, the associate Park Service director for science. "We have an obligation to take advantage of those teachable moments."
Glacier National Park is a perfect classroom, because with its easily identifiable receding glaciers it is a laboratory for measuring and predicting the changes.
There are only 27 glaciers left of the 150 that were here in 1850, at the end of the "little ice age" and the beginning of the current warming trend. At the present rate of warming, park scientists say, all the glaciers will be gone by 2030.
"Glaciers are an icon for climate change," said Daniel B. Fagre, an ecologist with the U.S. Geological Survey's Global Change Research Program at the park. "They're symbolic of change across ecosystems. They don't adapt, and they're an easy-to-identify physical phenomenon.
"People can get it: Ice melts when it gets warm. It's a teachable phenomenon."
What happens along with the vanishing glaciers is also instructive:
Snowpacks are melting two weeks earlier than they did 50 years ago. More precipitation arrives as rain instead of snow. Less glacial water feeds streams and lakes. Warmer waters mean fewer trout and other aquatic creatures that depend on cold water. Less snow means drier summers and falls, increasing the likelihood of fires.
Alpine meadows, which depend on heavy winter snowpacks, give way to forests. Animals and plants that flourish in meadows - mountain goats and bighorn sheep and marmots and butterflies - are replaced by forest wildlife.
The towering cedar-hemlock groves along Avalanche Creek, where 500-year-old stands of 100-foot-tall trees are remnants of an earlier, cooler climate, are likely to be replaced by other species, such as lodgepole pine.
Mountain pine beetles advance in warmer climates, which means fewer white bark pines, which means fewer pine nuts and army cutworm moths, two favored foods of the grizzly bears that roam Glacier.
Those cascading effects represent "a pretty fundamental shift in how the ecosystem works," Fagre said.
Similar ecological chains of events are playing out at national parks around the nation as the climate warms. (Since 1900, Glacier National Park's average summer temperatures have increased by about 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit.)
At Joshua Tree National Park, in the deserts of southern California, at least 90 percent of the Joshua trees are projected by researchers to be gone in the next century, as winters warm.
"The area will be hotter, the range will move northward, and Joshua trees don't propagate very quickly," said Deborah DeMeo, the California desert field representative of the National Parks Conservation Association. "The Joshua tree needs colder winters, and by making winters warmer, the Joshua tree won't survive."
In the Everglades, natural barriers are being lost as sea levels rise, and if the water rises faster than protective mangrove trees can keep up, much of the freshwater Everglades will disappear, replaced by saltwater wetlands and shallow bays.
South Florida's sea level has risen about 12 inches since 1846, and global warming is predicted to accelerate the trend. By 2100, the Park Service and Environmental Protection Agency predict, south Florida seas will be 20 inches higher than in 1990.
In Southeastern Pennsylvania, Valley Forge National Historical Park and Hopewell Furnace National Historic Site are home to 22 bird species whose numbers have been dwindling, including the osprey, Louisiana water thrush, wood thrush, and cerulean warbler. Climate-change-induced alterations to vegetation at the parks may mean further declines of the birds.
At many parks, managers have begun to identify natural "vital signs" to indicate how the health of the parks is changing.
Because national parks are so new (Yellowstone, created in 1870, was the world's first), there is little precedent for accommodating the demands of preservation to the imperatives of an ever-changing climate.
And the uncertainties about the extent of future change and all its causes make it even harder for park managers and visitors to cope.
There is no doubt that earth's temperatures and sea levels have risen in the past 150 years. An increase in heat-trapping gases in the atmosphere, such as carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide, are believed responsible for much of the increase.
The full extent of human responsibility for the increase is still a matter of political - and to a much smaller degree, scientific - debate. Scientists generally believe that the burning of fossil fuels in vehicles, factories and homes is responsible for most of the increase in greenhouse gases - and temperatures. There have been warmer periods in Earth's history, but not during human civilization, said Fagre, of the Global Change Research Program at Glacier National Park.
"The last time anything like this happened was at least 160,000 years ago," Fagre said. "We're entering new terrain. This is a human issue because we'll be affected and because we're having an effect. This is the first time we've had our fingers on the thermostat.
"We're simply pushing the system and we'll be affected by it in a way that hasn't happened before."
ONLINE EXTRA
To see how global warming has transformed Glacier National Park since 1850, go to http://inquirer.philly.com/rss/
news/glacier.ppt
Contact staff writer Paul Nussbaum at 25-854-4587 or pnussbaum@phillynews.com.

Load-Date: July 2, 2006


End of Documen
t



Storm intensity signals climate change; Hurricanes going from dangerous to deadly very quickly are occurring more often, research shows
The Philadelphia Inquirer
August 30, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL WEEKLY; Pg. K9
Length: 887 words
Byline: BY CHRIS MOONEY AND ANDREW FREEDMAN
Body


ABSTRACT
Hurricanes going from dangerous to deadly very quickly are occurring more often, research shows
Surveying the Gulf of Mexico late Tuesday afternoon, National Hurricane Center experts saw a Category 1 hurricane - dangerous, but not likely to cause major damage. Forecaster Jack Beven put the storm's maximum sustained wind speed at around 80 mph, forecasting a strong Category 2 storm by the next day.
Twenty-four hours later, Hurricane Laura was unrecognizable. It had rocketed into a high-end Category 4 storm, with wind speeds of nearly 145 mph, and was teetering toward Category 5 - the most dangerous.
It was one of the fastest transformations on record in the Gulf of Mexico.
Experts call the phenomenon "rapid intensification" and say it's happening more frequently, thanks in part to warming ocean temperatures driven by climate change. The speed with which these storms morph can complicate both weather forecasting and emergency responses.
"Laura is, unfortunately, an example of the forecaster's worst nightmare . . . rapid intensification of a storm in the day or so leading up to landfall," said MIT hurricane expert Kerry Emanuel.
Storms that quickly intensify close to land are not only likely to cause greater destruction, but they also allow little time for preparation - those in harm's way may not see what's coming.
Research shows that rapid intensification events are getting more common in the Atlantic hurricane region as the climate warms. In fact, some experts say, it is almost as if as the maximum "speed limit" for storms increases, the storms themselves, like drivers, are adjusting by speeding up.
Laura ties the record
Jim Kossin, a researcher at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the University of Wisconsin, says the warm ocean waters and exchange of heat between the ocean and atmosphere, plus the lack of dry air or strong upperlevel winds, created an ideal environment for Hurricane Laura to rapidly intensify all the way to the Louisiana coastline.
Kossin said the unusually warm waters of the Gulf are tied in part to human-caused global warming, since the vast majority of the heat trapped in the atmosphere by greenhouse gas emissions ends up in the ocean.
With a 65 mph wind speed increase in 24 hours, Laura easily clears the threshold for a "rapid intensification" event by the National Hurricane Center's standards.
What's more, Hurricane Laura - like Category 5 Hurricane Michael in 2018 and Category 4 Hurricane Harvey in 2017 - intensified through the point of landfall, rather than weakening as they approached the Gulf Coast, which until recently had been more typical behavior, and which occurred with Hurricane Katrina in 2005.
Suzana Camargo, a research professor at Columbia University's Lahmont-Doherty Earth Observatory, doubts a new trend of superstorms that don't weaken near land. She said it's more likely that storms that rapidly intensify tend not to follow the rules, period.
Scientists document the climate link
Increasingly, many scientists suspect climate change is playing a role in these events.
A 2019 study in the journal Nature documented a trend toward more rapidly intensifying hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean between 1982 and 2009, and used a model that determined it would have been unlikely without human-caused climate change. Another 2020 study by Kossin and his colleagues further cemented the point by showing that globally storms are more likely now to reach the highest hurricane categories.
"Our confidence continues to grow that storms have become stronger, and it is linked to climate change and they will continue to get stronger as the world continues to warm," Kossin said.
As the planet heats up, warm tropical ocean water from the surface down to a depth of tens of meters or more provides energy for hurricanes. With more energy, the storm strengthens faster than it typically would.
But there is some debate over whether the dramatic changes in the Atlantic, particularly since the 1980s, are chiefly caused by climate change or if atmospheric and oceanic cycles are also playing a role, said Gabriel Vecchi, a hurricane expert at Princeton University.
The forecasting problem
Whatever is causing the changes, experts say that forecasting rapid intensification is difficult and it lags behind improvements in determining where storms will actually go.
Hurricane Laura showcased the improvements made in forecasting a storm's path. The National Hurricane Center accurately predicted the landfall location to within 0.6 miles, and at nearly the exact time of landfall, 87 hours in advance.
Still, even as the number of rapidly intensified storms increase, they remain relatively rare, Kossin said.
"Forecasters are probably reluctant to go with a forecast of extreme, explosive intensification; you really go out on a limb there," he said. "They just don't have the guidance, so they tend to be more conservative."
While the official forecasts played catch-up with Laura, National Hurricane Center forecasters consistently warned in technical discussions read by meteorologists and emergency managers that the storm could become very intense and do so quickly. That way people paid close attention. "I think they did very well," Camargo said. "They warned days before that there's a chance it would become a very intense storm."

Load-Date: August 30, 2020


End of Documen
t



The politics of science: Evolution and climate change are shortcuts conveying broader messages
The Philadelphia Inquirer
August 23, 2011 Tuesday, CITY-C Edition


Copyright 2011 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; P-com News Nation-World; Pg. A03
Length: 890 words
Byline: By John Timpane

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


Presidential candidate Jon Huntsman has had a rollicking last few days. It all started with a tweet he posted Thursday: "To be clear. I believe in evolution and trust scientists on global warming. Call me crazy." 
Lunacy? Heresy? Politics. 
Huntsman was aiming at a rival, Gov. Rick Perry of Texas, who was dissing evolution and climate change on a roll through New Hampshire. 
The tweet spurred thousands of followers, retweets, and blog rants, inflated Huntsman's Klout score (one measure of influence on the Internet), and resurfaced in many Huntsman TV appearances. Life breathed again in a campaign that was (at ninth place in the Ames, Iowa, straw poll) dead on nonarrival. 
It says a lot about Huntsman, struggling to stand out from the GOP herd, and Perry, looking to lead the gallop. It says even more about how climate change and evolution remain potent in our politics, for reasons having little to do with science, and everything to do with getting votes. 
During a "Politics and Eggs" breakfast Wednesday in New Hampshire, Perry said that more and more scientists were challenging the notion "that man-made global warming is what is causing the climate to change." 
Huntsman fired off his tweet that afternoon. 
To add salsa to the taco, the next day, Perry said evolution was "a theory that's out there, and it's got some gaps in it." 
Gaps! Controversy! Politics. 
Charles Darwin's account of evolution is all but universally accepted. And most climatologists accept that our planet's climate is changing. It's harder to prove human beings are the culprits, but a predominance of scientists thinks so. 
In the funhouse of American politics, none of that matters. Forrest Wilder, staff writer at the Texas Observer, says: "We have a long history of political-religious debate between what science says and what people believe. And there's an anti-intellectual streak that's always been there. With conservative voters, it's been dialed up to the limit." 
The point is how things make people feel. In Darwin's account, human life arose from previous life-forms. To some people, that's like saying we're not special. To some, evolution threatens faith - though many, even Darwin, have said it needn't. To some ears, the words global warming seem to threaten sacred freedoms. 
Ross Baker, professor of political science at Rutgers University, calls such issues "heuristics," or shortcuts, that broadly convey a candidate's stances in a few words: "Issues such as evolution and climate change send a host of cues to voters. . . . To favor intelligent design is a shortcut to the fact that the candidate is a believing Christian. To deny man-made climate change is a cue that he or she opposes such things as cap-and-trade or a carbon tax. It is really a very efficient way to get the message across." 
In 2005, Pennsylvania took center stage in evolution politics when U.S. District Judge John E. Jones III, an observant Lutheran, ruled that the Dover public schools could not teach "intelligent design" (the belief that the universe is the product of a knowing, shaping creator) in science classes. Why? Um, well, it's not science. 
Rick Santorum, the former Pennsylvania senator, is also running for president. Asked his stance on these issues, he e-mailed: "I believe in Genesis 1:1 - God created the heavens and the earth. I don't know exactly how God did it or exactly how long it took him, but I do know that He did it. If Gov. Huntsman wants to believe that he is the descendant of a monkey, then he has the right to believe that - but I disagree with him on this and the many other liberal beliefs he shares with Democrats. 
"While I do believe the earth is currently warmer than it was - I also believe that the climate conditions are cyclical, and man-made global warming is largely an unproven scientific theory. The earth can get warmer and the earth can get cooler, and we simply cannot justify destroying our economy based on scientific uncertainties." 
What if you do science for a living? How does this whole debate strike you? For John Lundberg, curator of ichthyology (the study of fishes) at the Academy of Natural Sciences, it is cause for national sadness. 
"It strikes me as being a pretty sad commentary on the state of science education of the American public," Lundberg says. "This business about evolution has reached the point at which it's driving school curricula and textbook selection [as in Louisiana and Texas]. It's being used for political advantage, and some people want to keep it alive." 
On ABC's This Week on Sunday, Huntsman said, "The minute that the Republican Party becomes . . . the antiscience party, we have a huge problem." But in trusting scientists, Huntsman is hardly alone in the GOP. Mitt Romney has said he accepts both climate change and human involvement. And New Jersey Gov. Christie, once an avowed skeptic, said recently that "climate change is real," that "human activity plays a role in these changes," and that climate change is "impacting our state." 
Will Huntsman's gambit warm the world? Or will Rick Perry be the fittest who survives? 
It's still an evolving story in a changing climate. 
Contact staff writer John Timpane at 215-854-4406, jt@phillynews.com, or 
@jtimpane on Twitter. 

Load-Date: August 23, 2011


End of Documen
t



Call for Christie to consider climate change in Shore rebuilding
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 18, 2013 Monday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2013 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; P-com News for PC Home Page; Pg. A01
Length: 1010 words
Byline: By Matt Katz

Inquirer Trenton Bureau
Body


Did global warming and rising sea levels trigger Hurricane Sandy?
 And does it matter?
 Gov. Christie says it doesn't. Whether environmental changes caused the storm is an "esoteric question," he said at a news conference at the Shore earlier this month. Victims of the storm don't "give a damn" either - as confirmed by a group of Sandy survivors who applauded Christie's remark.
 But scientists say they all need to start caring. Because regardless of what caused Sandy, even those skeptical about climate change say a Sandy-like storm will happen again. And so, steps must be taken now to prevent loss of life and property later.
 Christie's focus, though, is more immediate: the tens of thousands of families who are still displaced, and a $16 billion Jersey Shore tourism industry, crucial to the state economy, that is struggling to get ready for the summer. When Christie's name is on the ballot in November, one year and one week after Sandy, he wants to say New Jersey is back to normal.
 Those political and economic demands of rebuilding immediately, however, conflict with the environmental demands of rebuilding slowly - or in some places, maybe not rebuilding at all.
 Christie sees larger environmental factors as irrelevant. "Maybe in the subsequent months and years, after I get done with rebuilding the state and getting people back in their homes," he said, "I'll have the opportunity to ponder the esoteric question of the causes of the storm."
 While scientists acknowledge that evidence doesn't yet exist to say climate change caused Sandy, they do know that sea levels are rising - maybe an additional four feet in New Jersey by 2100, according to a Rutgers University estimate. Research also shows that climate change may be making storms more intense.
 That means that, if there's another storm surge of the kind that swept houses off foundations during Sandy, even more water may rush ashore. All of this must be evaluated before the state rebuilds, scientists say.
 "How do you balance those issues, when there's intensive pressure to show that you're taking decisive action to help alleviate community suffering?" asked Gavin Smith, who runs the Center for the Study of Natural Hazards and Disasters at the University of North Carolina. "It's very difficult, but it happens routinely." 
 Smith has worked on storm recovery for two governors and is sympathetic to Christie's plight. He knows that making "hazard mitigation" part of disaster recovery is "not as sexy" as repaving roads, reopening schools, and restarting electricity.
 But, he said, it's more important. 
 "Sometimes, in the rush to recover, those communities are setting themselves up for the next disaster," Smith said, because storms "are almost assuredly going to get much, much worse."
 Proper preparation could mean "hardening" infrastructure (moving power lines underground, for example), forbidding construction in flood zones, modifying building codes, and lifting homes off the ground onto pilings. It could mean relocating people to denser developments that are less flood prone or building sea walls on the coast.
 "Those decisions need to be made now," Smith said.
 A Rutgers-Eagleton poll released last week showed that despite the rush to rebuild, 62 percent of New Jerseyans say assessing potential for future damage is more important than rebuilding by summer.
 Christie has, indeed, taken a major step that addresses flooding risks. He adopted preliminary flood maps from the Federal Emergency Management Agency that expanded flood zones and would force many to raise their houses. If they're not lifted, property owners face exponentially higher flood insurance.
 Some experts, though, see the maps as too weak because they are based on historical data and don't account for predictions about how future storms may be exacerbated by global warming.
 Another option for policymakers is to force property owners in flood zones to sell. But Christie said he was "uncomfortable" using condemnation to buy properties and turn flood zones into open space. He doesn't want to move homeowners unless entire communities agree to it.
 The Republican governor's approach is different from that of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, a Democrat, who has repeatedly spoken of the role climate change played in Sandy and has offered a $400 million buyout program. Democratic President Obama also linked Sandy and climate change last week in his State of the Union address.
 Meanwhile, Christie faces pushback from a significant interest group, environmentalists, who want a public planning process to determine the future of the Shore. They want decisions made based on science, not politics. And they are angry that Christie has rolled back measures to address the fossil fuels that they say contribute to climate change. 
 On the other side of the climate-change argument is David Legates, a University of Delaware geography professor who believes Sandy simply was a "freak storm." 
 "That having been said, there may very well be another Sandy in the future," he said, so additional discussions are needed.
 "It's sort of the American spirit of: We will rebuild, we will come back stronger," Legates said. "That's fine, but we have to rebuild smarter."
 Michael Oppenheimer, a climate expert at Princeton University, "personally respects" the governor's desire to get homeowners back to their properties, but he called his climate-change remark "baffling." Rebuilt infrastructure, like water facilities, are intended to last 100 years - so the constantly changing climate must be considered, he said.
 If destruction greets the Jersey Shore again, that "hurts everyone, including the homeowners and the larger community of the state that has to pay for this infrastructure," he said. So Oppenheimer just wants Christie to evaluate the risks, like politicians do on other issues.
 "This," he said, "is what we pay them for."
 Contact Matt Katz
 at 609-217-8355 or mkatz@phillynews.com, 
 or follow on Twitter @mattkatz00. Read his blog, "Christie Chronicles,"
 at www.philly.com/ christiechronicles.    

Graphic

 
N.J.Gov. Christie, in efforts to rebuild at the Shore, sees environmental factors as irrelevant. MICHAEL S. WIRTZ / Staff

Load-Date: February 18, 2013


End of Documen
t



Climate change in the curriculum; New Jersey mandates that it be taught at every grade level, and in a variety of classes.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
July 3, 2020 Friday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: THE REGION; Pg. B1
Length: 643 words
Byline: Melanie Burney STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
New Jersey mandates that it be taught at every grade level, and in a variety of classes.
New Jersey will soon require its public school students to learn another subject: climate change, from recycling and clean energy to conserving water and protecting the state's beaches.
The state will become the first in the country to infuse climate change into the curriculum at every grade level, officials said. The mandate takes effect with the 2021-22 school year.
The state Board of Education last month approved revisions to add climate change to seven standards: social studies, science, visual and performing arts, health and physical education, world languages, computer science and design thinking, and career readiness, life literacies, and key skills.
The move was spearheaded by the governor's wife, Tammy Murphy, a charter member of the Climate Reality Action Fund started by former Vice President Al Gore to put climate control on the political agenda. Gore and environmentalist groups supported the plan.
"We have a great ability in New Jersey to be in the forefront," Murphy said in an interview. "It's good for the future."
It will be up to local school boards to implement the mandate, including how to teach the curriculum and what books to read. Teachers will be able to modify existing lesson plans for the targeted subjects to include climate control. The state said it is developing guidelines for math and English language arts; those content standards were revised in 2016.
Murphy describes climate education as her "mini-obsession." She spent the last year meeting with educators to review the learning standards.
Some schools like Egg Harbor High in Atlantic County, Delran High, and Northern Burlington Regional High in Mansfield Township have already introduced climate change and sustainability programs, which were used as models.
"It's the right time and place to tackle this," Murphy said. "We are going to need climate literacy."
Her husband, Gov. Phil Murphy, shares her commitment and wants to make New Jersey a hub for the offshore wind energy industry. Last month, he announced plans to build the first port in the country dedicated to constructing colossal turbines for New Jersey and the eastern seaboard.
Gore is presenting an online workshop this month for New Jersey teachers to help them prepare lesson plans, Tammy Murphy said. There are also resources available from the state Department of Education and tips from other educators.
Like similar state mandates for public schools to infuse Black history, Holocaust, and LGBTQ education into the curriculum and not be a stand-alone subject taught occasionally, climate control is expected to be integrated into age-appropriate lesson plans as something students should know by the time they graduate.
In social studies, for example, students may research public policy on climate change learn about waterways, or analyze climate change computational models in computer science. In world language classes, the lesson could focus on the impact of climate change on a Spanishspeaking country.
"We expect this information to be woven through the curriculum," said Cherry Hill Superintendent Joseph Meloche. "It can't be something that just is relegated to regular science."
Meloche said his district plans to work on curriculum changes this summer. The state said districts should become familiar with the new standards during the upcoming school year and begin implementing them over the following two years.
In Cinnaminson, teachers are already discussing topics such as the impact humans have on the environment, and expanding their instruction across all disciplines should be an easy transition, said Frank Goulburn, curriculum director.
"Our teachers always find a way to make it work," he said. "There are always many things being added." mburney@inquirer.com
856-779-3814 mlburney

Load-Date: July 3, 2020


End of Documen
t



The planet's other threat; As the coronavirus spread and illness and death tolls rose, countries could not ignore the danger. There is a lesson for fighting climate change.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
April 26, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: CURRENTS; Pg. E1
Length: 1195 words
Byline: Lucas Isakowitz
Body


ABSTRACT
As the coronavirus spread and illness and death tolls rose, countries could not ignore the danger. There is a lesson for fighting climate change.
Earth Day is different this year. It's been a month since the Philadelphia government ordered the city to stay home. But it feels as if we have now lived years in a new - in many ways ravaged - reality.
It took the imminent threat of mass deaths at home - and the reality of mass deaths in other countries, like Italy and Spain - for the United States to take an existential threat like the coronavirus seriously. Because we waited, tens of thousands of Americans have died, with many more at risk. The coronavirus has shown us the staggering cost of government inaction when faced with an evolving crisis.
Costs of inaction
Intelligence reports and memos warning of the pandemic circulated in Washington as early as January, with top-level advisers warning President Donald Trump of the massive consequences associated with inaction. By mid-February, the virus had permeated more than a dozen countries, with Italy providing stark evidence that a top-tier health system could be overwhelmed. But it was not until mid-March that the White House issued social distancing recommendations for the nation - by then too little, too late to stop the United States from becoming the center of the pandemic.
Our city, state, and national leaders need to apply the lessons from the coronavirus to the other existential threat unfolding right now. That means communicating to constituents the urgency of the climate crisis, the consequences of not acting, and the availability of solutions. Climate change may be a more slowly evolving crisis, but left unchecked it stands to be more devastating.
The coronavirus has put millions of lives at risk and plunged the global economy into a nosedive. Climate projections for the world and region are grimmer. Storms, floods, and fires will cause trillions in damage to infrastructure and properties. Heat waves and unpredictable precipitation patterns will destroy food supplies, shrinking revenues for farmers and straining consumers. As many as two billion people could become climate refugees by the end the century, fleeing rising seas. A recent analysis from the International Panel on Climate Change puts the global price tag of floods, fires, heat waves, droughts, and storms by 2100 at about $70 trillion. Philadelphia itself is set to experience significantly more dangerously hot days (above 100 degrees), increased risk of flooding meaning a large hurricane would put our airport underwater, and an influx of climate refugees.
We will lose lives too. Air pollution from black carbon, methane, and nitrogen oxides - drivers of global warming - already cause an estimated seven million deaths each year. By 2100, the annual death toll could reach the tens of millions, with some dying from simply overheating (the human body starts to shut down at 104 degrees).
Amid these apocalyptic predictions, however, a crucial point often gets lost: We know how to avoid this catastrophe. We need to heed advice from experts - as we've been listening to public health experts during the coronavirus - and shift our economic and energy systems to balance growth with long-term sustainability.
A clear path forward
"We don't need a technological miracle to solve this problem," Mark Jacobson, professor of civil and environmental engineering at Stanford, told the New Yorker. "The bottom line is we just need to deploy, deploy, deploy."
A good first step is to shift public and private capital away from fossil fuels and toward renewable energy. Cities and states can embrace programs - like Philly's Solar Rebate Program - that make it easier to purchase and install renewable energy. They can also join carbon markets, like the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative Pennsylvania is slated to join. At the national level, we need to price carbon - charging polluters a fee for the greenhouse gas they emit, as the European Union and Australia have done - and reinvest those dollars into climate and socio-economic initiatives. Then we start to electrify everything we can, from transportation (more quickly adopting zero-emission vehicles) to industry (replacing fossil-fueled processes with electric substitutes) to buildings (ensuring new construction is built with energy-efficient, all-electric appliances).
Is there an up-front cost to this transition? Of course, but as with COVID-19, it makes economic sense to combat climate change preemptively. And we still have some time to mitigate climate change with fewer sacrifices than those required to beat the coronavirus. We do not need to tank the global economy. We do not even need to enter another recession. In fact, upfront investment in renewable energy is likely to generate growth, creating tens of millions of new jobs; some research suggests green investments could create two to three times more jobs than similar investments in fossil fuels.
The coronavirus demonstrates that the world is capable - even if with missteps - of rapid collective action. Nations have gone into lockdown. Nonessential businesses have shuttered, airlines have grounded fleets, and governments have injected trillions into the global economy to keep businesses and people from drowning. As the economy stutters, leaving more than 20 million Americans without jobs, almost 85% of the country still agrees that halting the virus is more important than restarting the economy. Far from this being over, governments around the world are digging deep to win this war.
Treating the coronavirus like a war, with matching rhetoric, is part of what has made efforts successful. In the United States, governors and mayors have stepped into the vacuum of federal leadership, explaining both the magnitude of the problem and pathways to safety. "We're not fighting a battle here, we're fighting a war" Gov. Tom Wolf said last month, before outlining how social distancing can save thousands of Pennsylvanians. The logic here is simple: Many people will die if we do not change behaviors and follow the rules. We need our leaders to employ a similar rhetoric of urgency and solutions when it comes to climate change.
The biggest reason for nonaction in the climate space is complacency - we leave it to future generations to solve the problem. But the coronavirus demonstrates that fear and truth can motivate action against a threat - even one that is abstract to those lucky enough to not yet have been touched by it.
If we want to beat climate change, we have about a decade to jump-start an economic transformation with "no documented historic precedent," per the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's warning in 2018. The coronavirus offers useful signposts: It shows the cost of stuttering, but also provides precedent for massive collective action.
We will get through this crisis. When we do, we"ll confront another one. What are we going to do then?
Lucas Isakowitz is a master's student at the Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies. He is a native Philadelphian, and a graduate of Central High School and the University of Pennsylvania.

Load-Date: April 26, 2020


End of Documen
t



Climate change cited in dengue surge; Unprecedented outbreak in Nepal of mosquitoborne virus raises alarms as global tally climbs
The Philadelphia Inquirer
October 13, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL WEEKLY; Pg. K11
Length: 929 words
Byline: BY JOANNA SLATER in Kathmandu, Nepal
Body


ABSTRACT
Unprecedented outbreak in Nepal of mosquitoborne virus raises alarms as global tally climbs
His boss fell sick first, with aching pains and a high temperature. Then, some of his colleagues began showing similar symptoms. By the time Rajkumar Adhikari, 35, grew feverish and started vomiting, he learned that the sickness had a name: dengue.
Adhikari, a technician at a company that makes batteries in Nepal's capital, said he had not heard of dengue before this year, when it struck half of the staff at his office. He felt weak, his nose began to bleed and his joints were so painful it was "hard to bear," he said from his hospital bed this past month.
Nepal, a Himalayan nation wedged between India and China, is experiencing an unprecedented outbreak of dengue this year, part of a broader resurgence in the mosquito-borne viral disease that experts say is linked to a changing climate. In Nepal, there have been nearly 11,000 cases of dengue since mid-July, according to government figures, more than five times the previous annual peak.
Nepal is far from alone. From Brazil to Bangladesh, Honduras to the Philippines, the number of reported dengue cases has surged this year. There has been a "huge increase," said Raman Velayudhan, the task force lead for dengue at the World Health Organization. "Unfortunately, things are a little grim at the moment."
Preliminary figures from the WHO show 2.7 million reported cases worldwide through August. This year's final tally is likely to match the worst years on record for dengue, Velayudhan said. In the Philippines alone, more than 1,000 people have died.
Dengue turns out to be ideally suited for a warming, urbanizing world. Present in fewer than 10 countries in the 1970s, it has since spread to more than 120. Dengue is fatal in less than 1 percent of cases and most people recover on their own, but careful supervision is sometimes required to treat severe manifestations of the disease. There is no medication to cure it, nor is there a widely approved vaccine.
As climate change brings rising temperatures and unpredictable rainfall patterns, researchers say that 500 million more people could be at risk of contracting diseases like dengue over the next 30 years. Dengue is "headed out of the tropics and it's also headed to higher elevations," said Colin Carlson, a postdoctoral fellow at Georgetown University who studies the link between climate and mosquito-borne illnesses. "This is one of the ways in which climate change threatens global health."
The mosquito that spreads dengue - Aedes aegypti - thrives in warm temperatures and urban environments. The ideal temperature range for the mosquito to transmit the virus is between about 70 and 93 degrees, researchers say. Meanwhile, its larvae can breed in the amount of standing water held by a bottle cap.
"In general, if you have warmer and wetter conditions, it's more favorable to the mosquito," said Rachel Lowe, a professor at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. But dengue outbreaks can also occur during droughts, when people are forced to store water, she said.
Lowe added that the spread of dengue is also driven by the unplanned growth of cities, whose dense populations provide ample opportunities for contact between humans and mosquitoes and offer plenty of containers where larvae can grow.
Another worrying characteristic of the dengue virus is its four strains. If people are infected with one strain, they will develop an immunity to it. But if the same people are subsequently infected by a different strain, they are more likely to develop a severe case of dengue, raising the possibility of more serious outbreaks in the future.
Adhikari, the technician in Nepal, was sick for five days before being admitted to the Sukraraj Tropical and Infectious Disease Hospital in Kathmandu. When his colleagues realized that dengue was working its way through the office, they began to kill any mosquitoes they could find and sought out areas where the insects could breed: an upturned lid, a blocked drain, a collection of plastic waste.
Anup Bastola, a senior doctor at the hospital where Adhikari was treated, said that he saw about a dozen dengue cases last year after the country's monsoon. This year, the rains arrived early - and the number of dengue patients spiked. Since mid-July, the hospital has diagnosed at least 2,500 cases and admitted more than 260 dengue patients, he said.
"It was terrible. I've never seen such a situation in this hospital," Bastola said. He now spends 11-hour days at the hospital and his family jokes that to see him, they need to turn on the television, where he has appeared repeatedly to educate the public on dengue and the need for mosquito control. Eight of the hospital's staff members were infected.
In Nepal, people were either unaware of dengue, Bastola said, or considered it a disease of the country's Terai region, the lowlands in the south that border India. But this year, cases have been reported in 67 of the country's 77 districts, including hilly and mountainous areas. At least six people have died.
Bibek Kumar Lal, a doctor who heads the epidemiology and disease-control division of Nepal's Health Ministry, remarked, half in jest, that his division should be renamed the "dengue control" division.
In September, Lal said, the prime minister's office organized a meeting to help coordinate the response to the upsurge in dengue cases. Lal acknowledged that this year's outbreak was the start of a much longer battle. "Our next generation is going to live with dengue," he said.

Load-Date: October 13, 2019


End of Documen
t



Call to action on climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 6, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. C5
Length: 690 words
Byline: Darryl Williams and Rachel Valletta
Body


We're used to thinking about climate change as a future problem: In 2050, temperatures will rise ... By 2100, sea levels will be ...
But the future has arrived, right now in 2019. A federal report has already updated our narrative completely, showing us that catastrophic climate change is here - and what we can do about it.
On Nov. 23, the federal government released the second volume of the Fourth National Climate Assessment (NCA4). At over 1,600 pages, the NCA4 is a comprehensive analysis of the impacts of climate change across the United States.
The report's core messages are clear: Climate change is real. It's happening now. It's bad. It's getting worse.
However, Americans are starting to prepare, and there is no better time to amplify those efforts. Here is what we know:
It's real. It's happening now. It's bad: NCA4 describes the pernicious and extensive impacts of climate change wrought across the country: larger wildfires on the West Coast; thawing permafrost and degrading landscapes in Alaska; increasingly arid farmlands in the Midwest; monstrous hurricanes in the Southeast; and, here in the Northeast Corridor, intensifying downpours and flooding.
It's getting worse: Climate change is exacerbating, and in some cases, creating vulnerabilities in our communities. These impacts will be felt worst by those with the least, in neighborhoods and populations without the capacity to prepare for and recover from extreme weather and climate-related events.
As climate change progresses, the more dangerous these impacts will become. What's at stake? City infrastructure, water quality, our health and that of our children, and our livelihoods. Even our cultural identity - who we are as Philadelphians - will come to mean something different as our relationships with weather patterns and seasons, food choices, and sense of place begin to morph.
Americans are preparing: While the science presented in NCA4 may be daunting, the stories of positive change send a necessary, uplifting message. States, cities, and municipalities are increasingly adopting climate adaptation and mitigation plans - new policies intended to both prepare ourselves for the impacts of climate change and prevent it from further worsening. As an early leader in sustainability planning, the report cites Philadelphia's own Office of Sustainability and its Growing Stronger: Towards a Climate Ready Philadelphia plan.
As with any new policy measure, educational partnerships can help build the social will and public capacity necessary to reach our goals. At the Franklin Institute, our Climate and Urban Systems Partnership (CUSP, www.cusp-project.org) has established best practices to engage Philadelphia in climate-change education that focuses on solutions, like using green infrastructure to lessen ambient air temperatures during heat waves and to mitigate flooding and combined sewer overflow caused by downpours. We have had the great fortune to support nearly 100 diverse partner organizations -including community organizers, research scientists, city agencies, artists, and academic institutions - and help them improve their work as it relates to climate-change science and communication.
The work doesn't stop there. Enduring climate action will require the support of businesses, many of whom already know that sustainable practices and continued growth are not mutually exclusive. Not only is climate-change education an inroad to employee engagement; managing the effects of climate change can support corporate continuity and make progress toward social, environmental, and financial goals all at the same time.
Addressing climate change may well be the greatest challenge of our time - and we have the opportunity to rise to the challenge. For our part, we'll continue offering the high-quality education necessary to fulfill climate action goals. But we need all hands on deck for this. If nothing else, the NCA4 is a call to action.
You ready, Philadelphia?
Darryl Williams (dwilliams@fi.edu) is senior vice president of science and education, and Rachel Valletta
(rvalletta@fi.edu) is the environmental scientist, at the Franklin Institute.

Load-Date: January 6, 2019


End of Documen
t



Index fund giant takes on climate change; BlackRock's pledge highlights the concentration of power the Big Three wield.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 19, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. E1
Length: 1471 words
Byline: Erin Arvedlund STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
BlackRock's pledge highlights the concentration of power the Big Three wield.
BlackRock CEO Larry Fink last week threw down the gauntlet to Wall Street, pledging that the world's largest asset manager will lead the way in shareholder activism and demand climate change and environmental risk analysis from corporate America.
How will its fiercest competitor, Vanguard, respond? By sticking to its current strategy.
"We've been very clear and transparent on climate issues and our approach," said Vanguard spokesperson Alyssa Thornton.
"Vanguard has and will continue to address climate change risk and advocate for transparent disclosure on climate-related matters through our company engagements and industry advocacy efforts," said Thornton. She referred investors to the firm's 2019 stewardship report, available on Vanguard's website.
Vanguard currently manages $6 trillion in assets - $5.2 trillion excluding money market funds - just behind No. 1 BlackRock, best known for its iShares exchange-traded index funds, with $7 trillion under management. The No.3 index fund manager, State Street Corp., manages $2.9 trillion. These three firms together hold about 80% of all indexed money, according to Bloomberg data. The combined Schwab-TD Ameritrade would have $5.1 trillion, assuming the merger goes through.
In the short term, Vanguard may offer more ESG - or environmental-social-governance - investment funds that appeal to investors with a climateconscious bent.
"This could push Vanguard to launch more ESG funds, though that trend is already in place, as three out of the last six new funds and exchangetraded funds at Vanguard were ESG-oriented," according to Jeffrey DeMaso, research director for the Independent Adviser for Vanguard Investors newsletter.
"We have said in the past that an ESG bond fund would be the next" possible offering, DeMaso said. "That would pave the way for Vanguard to launch ESG versions of their Target Retirement Funds."
The driving force will be investor demand. For all the hype about the rise of ESG, investors have not poured money into these funds. Vanguard's Social Index Fund had its best year for net inflows of $1.4 billion in 2019, but that still trails well behind the $12.5 billion that went to Vanguard's Total Stock Market Index Fund.
Vanguard's new ESG offerings took in a combined $1.2 billion in 2019, into Global ESG Select Stock, ESG U.S. Stock ETF, and ESG International Stock ETF. Overall, ESG-oriented funds only counted for 1.2% of Vanguard's net inflows last year. That's up from 0.4% of Vanguard's flows in 2018, DeMaso estimated.
Big Three
BlackRock's pledge also shines a light on the massive concentration of ownership among index fund giants - in particular, the "Big Three" BlackRock, Vanguard, and State Street.
"The common ownership of the Big Three is an unintended consequence of the success of index funds. It's a hard one to unravel as index funds - really, low-cost funds - have been a clear benefit to shareholders. A lot of the concerns raised about common ownership are harder to see, prove, and solve," DeMaso said.
Their combined size has emerged as the chief concern about the Big Three firms BlackRock, Vanguard, and State Street - that their control of passive index funds incentivizes voting with management.
Just before he died in January 2019, Vanguard founder John C. Bogle - the founder of index investing - warned that index funds were so successful that these could one day effectively control the U.S. stock market, as he wrote in the Wall Street Journal.
"I do not believe that such concentration would serve the national interest," Bogle wrote in his oped.
The Big Three "present a very serious problem because of the power they wield through their ownership," agreed Bruce Freed, president of the Center for Political Accountability, which focuses on corporate political disclosure.
"Only now is BlackRock moving on climate change, but it remains to be seen what that really means," Freed said. "It will put pressure on Vanguard, Fidelity, and Charles Schwab."
Schwab currently has $3.94 trillion in client assets, and once merged with TD Ameritrade, would hit $5.1 trillion. A Schwab spokesperson declined to comment on BlackRock, saying "many clients want their investments to align with their values, and we know those values are unique to every individual. We believe it's important for Schwab to provide investors with access to a broad range of ESG-oriented products, as well as the guidance and tools to use them appropriately."
"We have found that companies undercut their position on issues like climate change through their political spending. Black-Rock has not budged from its voting against" shareholder resolutions demanding transparency on political donations, Freed noted.
Follow through
Do environmentalists believe BlackRock will act on CEO Fink's pledge?
"Voting against management and boards would be very significant - and I'd say it's very much up in the air whether BlackRock is actually going to start putting their votes where their mouth is on a meaningful basis," said Patrick McCully, climate and energy program director at the Rainforest Action Network in San Francisco.
"BlackRock still needs to go much, much further on divestment to live up to its potential to push companies to aligning on Paris and 1.5 degrees," considered the danger line for warming, he said, for example, divesting from companies planning to expand fossil fuels and from companies planning new coal plants or tar sand mines or oil pipelines.
He'd like BlackRock to "tell all fossil fuel companies that they will divest if they foot-drag on coming up with long-term zero-carbon plans. So there is plenty of room for others to announce these types of measures and so steal the mantle of 'greenest megamoney manager' that [BlackRock's] Fink has given himself," McCully said.
In 2019 reports, both BlackRock and Vanguard highlighted the importance of disclosure in relation to climate risks.
However, BlackRock and Vanguard aren't acting to ensure that those risks are disclosed, managed, and mitigated through strategy and planning that aligns with global carbon targets, according to Majority Action's 2019 "Climate in the Boardroom" report.
In its 2019 engagement report, Vanguard "goes so far as to disavow direct intervention at companies in relation to the material risks caused by climate change. Vanguard asserts that instead of engaging directly on specific climate strategy and outcomes, it seeks to promote 'robust board oversight and meaningful company disclosure.' This approach is belied by Vanguard's voting record in 2019, when it voted against governance reforms at the full range of oil and gas and utility companies surveyed in this report," Majority Action alleges.
Too big?
Bogle's worry about market concentration had been on his mind for a few years. In 2017 at the CFA Institute's convention in Philadelphia, he spelled out his thoughts on the increasing power of index funds since the great financial crisis.
Bogle noted that since 2007, equity index mutual funds enjoyed capital inflows of $1.8 trillion over the ensuing 10 years while their actively managed counterparts were hit with $800 billion of capital outflows.
"Index fund management is heavily concentrated among three giant, trillion-dollar money managers that together hold some 20% of U.S. stocks. That concentration is concerning to me," he told the CFA crowd. Those three firms - Blackrock, Vanguard, and State Street at that point owned about 21% of the indexing market.
By founding Vanguard, "I didn't intend to create a colossus," Bogle continued, but he should have realized that investors would take advantage of a great deal.
"Passive investing is here to stay. Will indexing ever get to 50% of the market? Maybe, but that could take 10 to 15 years. And we'll never get to 75%," he said.
Not every Wall Streeter thinks concentration is a problem among index fund firms. Moreover, BlackRock may simply be virtue-signaling and have no plans for concrete action.
Larry Fink's climate change messages "sound good to many investors. More important, however, is that Larry remains focused on his most important constituent, which is investors. What sounds good is not always good. Larry needs to continue being a good steward of shareholder capital in order to sustain his business," said New Constructs' CEO David Trainer, a long-time Wall Street equity analyst.
In theory, addressing climate change "could cost him and shareholders lots of money, and, therefore, undermine the viability of the business, in which case he could no longer address climate change," Trainer said. The "primary responsibility of corporate managers is to maximize shareholder capital so that there are more profits to enrich the community." earvedlund@inquirer.com
215-854-2808 erinarvedlund

Load-Date: January 19, 2020


End of Documen
t



A nice day comes with a cloud; As city enjoyed a mild Saturday, climate change was on many minds.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 12, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: THE REGION; Pg. B5
Length: 617 words
Byline: Cassie Owens STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
As city enjoyed a mild Saturday, climate change was on many minds.
It was a day to be out. Commercial corridors were busy. Corners became spots for making conversation. Dirt-bike riders hit their wheelies. Parents watched their kids explore jungle gyms. One couple taking a stroll along Girard Avenue swung their arms gleefully as they held hands. At Penn Treaty Park, Abayomi Oladeinde sat on a bench with his daughter and watched the river flow. All he wanted, he explained, was the fresh air.
"You have a cough?" he posed as an example. "The fresh air will neutralize everything you have."
In summer, Oladeinde, 66, drives to that park for the healing benefits of just breathing, the way he did by the lagoon or by ocean in his native Nigeria years ago. He wasn't going to let Saturday's upper-60s temperatures slip by him, but he also said the winter warmth makes him a little worried.
"People are talking about climate change," he said. "This roller-coaster weather is going to have a negative effect [at some point]. We need to be careful. We need to be watchful."
Philadelphia doesn't really waste nice weekend weather. If anything, based on the still-damp sidewalks and thick blanket of clouds, Saturday showed that Philadelphians will even treat temperate weather as an opportunity. But in public spaces in Fishtown and West Philadelphia, residents spoke to both the pleasure of a mild day in January and concerns around changing climates. Or as Quentin Francis, who was out playing basketball with friends and family in Cobbs Creek, put it: "a suspiciously nice day."
This was record-breaking weather by Saturday afternoon, when the high temperature reached 67 degrees. According to the National Weather Service in Mount Holly, the warmest Jan. 11 on record had previously been in 1975, at 66 degrees. (Records date back to 1873.)
Krista Booker, 24, of Sicklerville, and Trevor Philbrick, 23, of Lansdale, had come to the city to have breakfast with friends.
"We didn't want to go home since it was so nice out," Philbrick explained as the two shared a bench in Penn Treaty Park and a breeze where warmth and chill commingled coming in from the river. "This is my ideal temperature."
Booker was also loving how the day felt.
"I was telling him, I just get the best mood the warmer it is," she said, later reflecting: "It's hard to not be selfish. A part of me is like, 'Oh yes, good.' But another part of me is like, 'Is it good?' "
A 2011 study from the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology revealed that when survey-takers experienced warmer weather - or even a hotter-than-usual room - they were more likely to believe global warming is real. That result was so for both conservatives and liberals.
Hotter temperatures and bigger storms in Philadelphia have become common in recent decades. According to a 2018 analysis, out of the wettest months on record, six have happened since 1994. Of the heaviest recorded snowfalls in Philadelphia, five have happened since 1996.
"Global warming is a thing," said Kijana Anderson, 20, outside Laura Sims Skate House in Cobbs Creek.
"That's definitely facts," his friend Teriq Mapp agreed.
"I would have never expected it to be 60 degrees in January," Anderson continued, giving a low estimate.
Mapp said he wished other people "were enlightened about the environment. Because what we do on a day-to-day basis impacts the environment and our health."
Mapp, a college student who attends West Chester, is coaching ice hockey while he's home. Only five kids showed up at the Laura Sims rink Saturday, he said, and none of them were younger kids. He didn't seem too bothered. He figured their parents took them out to play. cowens@inquirer.com cassieowens

Load-Date: January 12, 2020


End of Documen
t



Climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
December 9, 2018 Sunday


Copyright 2018 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL WEEKLY; Pg. K23
Length: 760 words
Byline: BY KATHARINE HAYHOE
Body


The Fourth National Climate Assessment - the work of 13 federal agencies and more than 350 scientists, including me - is clear: The Earth is warming faster than at any time in human history, and we're the ones causing it. Climate change is already affecting people, and the more carbon we produce, the more dangerous the effects over the coming century. Nevertheless, many people continue to believe and propagate some misleading myths. Here are the five I hear most frequently.
MYTH NO. 1
Climate scientists are in it for the money.
When the second volume of the National Climate Assessment was released last month, Rick Santorum, a Republican former senator from Pennsylvania, took to CNN to proclaim that climate scientists "are driven by the money that they receive."
I was one of the report's authors. How much did I earn? Nothing.
The reality is that nearly every climate scientist could make at least the same amount of money in a different field, including the oil industry. And the money we do receive in grants doesn't go into our pockets. A $1.1 million grant from the National Science Foundation provided me with a mere $37,000 a year, all of which went to paying for the proposed work. Santorum, meanwhile, receives a substantial income from serving as a consultant to Consol Energy, a coal company.
MYTH NO. 2
The climate has changed before. It's just a natural cycle.
Last fall, when the first volume of the National Climate Assessment was released, White House spokesman Raj Shah responded that "the climate has changed and is always changing."
But we can look at the natural factors that affect the climate. First, over the past few decades, energy from the sun has been going down, not up, so if changes in the sun's energy drove our temperature, we should be getting cooler, not warmer.
Others argue that we're getting warmer because we're recovering from the last ice age. But ice ages - and the warm periods in between - are caused by the Earth's orbital cycles, and according to those cycles, the next event on our geologic calendar is another ice age, not more warming.
We can also rule out volcanoes, which do produce heat-trapping gases, but less than 1 percent of the CO2 that humans produce. The climate change we're experiencing now definitely isn't natural.
MYTH NO. 3
Climate scientists are split on whether it's real.
We often hear that climate scientists are split 50-50 when it comes to whether global warming is occurring.
In reality, more than 97 percent of climate scientists agree that global warming is happening and that humans are causing it. At least 18 scientific societies in the United States, from the American Geophysical Union to the American Medical Association, have issued official statements on climate change. The public confusion has been manufactured by industry interests and ideologues to muddy the waters.
MYTH NO. 4
Climate change won't affect me.
While 70 percent of American adults agree that climate change is happening, only 40 percent of those surveyed believe it will harm them personally. Sure, it'll hurt polar bears, and maybe people who live on low-lying islands in the South Pacific. But the world has warmed by just 1 degree Celsius, or 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit, since 1900. What's the big deal?
Climate change is a threat multiplier that touches everything, from our health to our economy to our coasts to our infrastructure. It makes heat waves stronger, heavy precipitation events more frequent and hurricanes more intense, and it nearly doubles the area burned by wildfires. It supercharges natural disasters such as Hurricane Harvey and the Camp Fire, as those suffering the effects impacts of these events know this firsthand.
MYTH NO. 5
It's cold outside - global warming can't be real.
Cold weather doesn't rebut the data that shows the planet is warming over climate time scales. Think of it this way: Weather weather is like your mood, and climate is like your personality. Weather is what occurs in a certain place at a certain time. Climate is the longterm average of weather over decades. Global warming or not, cold days still occur, particularly in winter. But since 2000, we're seeing far more new hot-temperature records than cold ones. In fact, in 2017, we saw more than 10,000 cold-temperature records broken at weather stations across the United States. And more than 36,000 high-temperature records were broken the same year.
Hayhoe is a professor and director of the Climate Science Center at Texas Tech University. She is a lead author on Volumes 1 and 2 of the Fourth National Climate Assessment.

Load-Date: December 9, 2018


End of Documen
t



The end of wine as we know it; As climate change affects where grapes can thrive, researchers are at work on how growers can adapt
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 9, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL WEEKLY; Pg. K17
Length: 922 words
Byline: BY LAURA REILEY
Body


ABSTRACT
As climate change affects where grapes can thrive, researchers are at work on how growers can adapt
The prospect of hotter summers, warmer winters, drought and violent weather events have caused experts to warn of coming wine shortages, price increases and dire predictions of the extinction of some wines altogether.
Maybe there's a fix, says a research paper in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
The scientists' computer models show that if we do nothing, global warming of 2 degrees Celsius would wipe out 56 percent of current wine-growing land; increase that to 4 degrees and an estimated 85 percent of grapes will not be viable.
This team of researchers investigated whether using more heattolerant grapes would allow vineyards to adapt. They found that by reshuffling where certain grape varieties are grown, potential losses at 2 degrees of warming could be halved, and cut by a third if warming reached 4 degrees.
The researchers, led by Ignacio Morales-Castilla at the University of Alcalá in Spain and Elizabeth Wolkovich at the University of British Columbia at Vancouver, focused on 11 varieties of wine grapes including cabernet sauvignon, chardonnay, merlot, pinot noir, riesling, sauvignon blanc and syrah, as well as lesser-known varieties chasselas, grenache, monastrell (also known as mourvedre) and ugni blanc. Together, these account for a third of the total area planted to wine grapes and represent important parts of the wine industry in France, Australia, New Zealand and Chile.
The team used vintner and researcher archives to build a model for when each would bud, flower and ripen in wine-growing regions around the world under three different warming scenarios. Then it used climate change projections to see where those varieties would be viable in the future.
"Each variety has a different sensitivity to the climate," says Ben Cook, one of the study's authors and a professor at Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory and the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies. "Basically, replacing varieties with more climatically suitable varieties, called cultivar turnover, increases resilience to climate change. It's a story of mitigation and adaptation."
In the study's modeling, the biggest losses are in Spain, Italy and parts of California that are already quite warm. But there are winners in warming scenarios: In Germany, northern Europe and the Pacific Northwest of the United States, where in some years they struggle to get enough sun hours to facilitate budding, fruit set and ripening, a warming trend might produce dramatically better wines.
Cook says that changing out grape varieties isn't the only solution to pushing back against the effects of climate change. Many vineyards are topographically complex and will allow microclimates, especially if vineyards move to higher ground. Moving vineyards to north-facing slopes might also slow the effects. And in France, Cook says, where irrigation is not utilized, watering could be employed.
"We wanted to give a different perspective on all those apocalyptic takes," Cook says. "Winemakers are becoming more interested and aware of climate change and a lot of them are really concerned. They are seeing things they haven't seen before, with storms and heat waves. But what you do about it is a complicated thing."
Geoff Kruth, the president of GuildSomm, an international organization for sommeliers, says wineries are understandably concerned about the uncertainties of climate change, "but it's important to remember that there are dozens of human decisions - rootstocks, trellising, timing of vineyard work, etc. - that have significant impacts on how a vine reacts to a climate."
Many wine industry experts have pointed to increased ripeness in grapes and higher alcohol levels as indications of climate change.
"The real reason wines got riper is that people wanted them to get riper. Generally, if you look at wines from the 2000s, you see more sugar in the grapes and more alcohol in the wines," Kruth says. "People have been quick to associate this with climate change, when in reality it was conscious human decisions. Now you see the alcohols are dropping. It's a consumer trend. The grower and winemaker have a strong hand in all of these things."
Mike Heny, a longtime Virginia winemaker who makes wine for 15 vineyards in the state, points to steps that already have been taken around the world to address climate change.
"It's a multipronged approach," Henry says. "In Napa, people are removing the primary grape cluster so the secondary one is the one that gets turned into wine so you can push off ripening, which allows for lower potential alcohol and greater physiological maturity so you get greater flavors. People are leaving a bit more canopy, carrying a bigger fruit crop to delay ripening, picking earlier."
Champagne is looking at England as a new venue for highquality sparkling wines. In July, Bordeaux allowed a number of new grapes to be planted, he says. It was previously illegal to plant anything but the five main historic grapes. And in Italy, a new VCR program is working to breed traditional vinifera grapes such as merlot with hybrids that are hardier and exhibit more resistance.
The question for Heny and other winemakers is whether consumers will be amenable to these changes.
"A mutt is better than a purebred when the going gets tough," Heny says. "But people aren't into drinking the mutt wines as much. At the end of the day, we have to make wines that people love."

Load-Date: February 9, 2020


End of Documen
t



Fall Palette; If leaves seem subdued, is it climate change?
The Philadelphia Inquirer
October 25, 2019 Friday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: THE REGION; Pg. B1
Length: 1214 words
Byline: Frank Kummer STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
If leaves seem subdued, is it climate change?
Dressed for fall in a red flannel shirt and jeans, Dennis Cermak settled down on a dock at Scott's Run Lake in French Creek State Park and cast his line in search of supper - and some peace.
Upcoming cancer treatments were weighing on Cermak's mind, so he picked a perfect fall day with clear skies, a slight breeze, and a crystal-blue lake 592 feet above sea level to help calm it. Even more medicinal: a backdrop bouquet of red, yellow, and orange leaves as fall foliage neared its peak.
"I'm hoping for fish tacos tonight," Cermak, 64, said with a grin Wednesday, standing next to a vibrant birch in the park, which straddles Chester and Berks Counties.
Fall leaf peeping in this region is an event, and people like Cermak, of Spring City, Chester County, flock to parks, take meandering hikes, and go on long drives in search of the perfect hues. But in recent years, some have been disappointed with muted colors, trees that seem to suddenly drop browned leaves, or the sense that fall is coming later and later.
Is it climate change?
"There's a well-established body of science that explains how our forests will be affected by climate change," said Ryan Reed, an environmental education specialist with the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources' Bureau of Forestry. "Those effects can be seen on a regular basis.
But Reed is quick to caution against reading too much into one season. Hardwoods, which usually offer prime colors during leaf-changing season in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, have been struck the last two years with anthracnose, a leaf disease caused by the fungus Apiognomonia. The disease causes leaves to turn brown and die.
It's brought on by unusually wet conditions, such as we have experienced in the last two years. All that rain may be part of climate change.
"As far as day to day, week to week, or even season to season, can you say what you're really seeing is the result of climate change?" Reed asked. "Any respectable scientist will say no," he said, referring to the scientific method's insistence on examining total evidence, not declaring cause-and-effect over the short term.
"But what you can say is that it does fit the theory. I think climate change is so accepted now, that this fits the theory. It's not a hypothesis anymore."
Pennsylvania, which boasts of having a longer and more varied "fall foliage season than any other state in the nation - or anywhere in the world," according to the state Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, is approaching peak color right now in the Southeastern region.
It is rebounding from a dry spell to be a pretty normal year, said Rick Hartlieb, assistant district forest manager at William Penn Forest District, which includes French Creek State Park. The creek is a tributary of the Schuylkill, and the water ultimately empties into the Delaware River.
Hartlieb said peak foliage this year "is spot on" as he climbed a fire tower with a 360-degree view of nearly 8,000 acres of state land. Peak usually comes about Oct. 25.
Actually, the real start of fall never changes, regardless of conditions, because it is timed to the autumnal equinox, which fell on Sept. 23 this year. Trees react to multiple cues, the lack of daylight chief among them. But they also react to moisture, heat, wind, and pests - all of which can affect leaf color in any given year.
And all of those factors can play out differently across the region, even within neighborhoods.
How people view leaf color is also a subjective experience, with some preferring reds over yellows or orange. Any change in the pattern can be disappointing, depending on your perspective.
How long intense color lasts and the proportion of reds, yellows, and fuchsias can also change year to year. As climate change causes tree patterns to shift, as scientists say it will continue to do, color combinations will change.
Pigments cause leaf colors. Chlorophylls produce the greens of photosynthesis, the process by which trees convert sunlight to food. When days shorten, trees can no longer use the sun for food and chlorophyll drains away, allowing other pigments to shine.
Carotenoids produce orange. Xanthophylls produce yellows. Anthocyanins, red pigments, aren't made in the summer and appear only in fall.
Sugar maples can turn yellow and red, for example. Tulip poplar is known for its yellows. If one type of tree is dominant in the area, that means one color will really pop. But climate change is expected to alter the mix of colors as trees more prominent in the South take root in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.
A DCNR report found that since the early 20th century the Commonwealth has seen a temperature increase of 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit. Winter temperatures have seen the fastest rise, increasing 1.3 degrees Fahrenheit per decade from 1970 to 2000 in the Northeastern U.S., according to the report.
Many people, however, say they are noticing something else - a more muted fall.
"The fall colors are simply not arriving," said Charles Hurst, a Haverford resident. "Leaves turn from green to rust or brown, then drop. There are a few vivid yellows, little orange, and almost no bright red. It's not only this year but a trend."
Hurst said he's noticed it since about 2008 and said it's a hot topic in his house.
Patricia Leopold, with the Northern Institute of Applied Climate Science, said studies show warmer conditions delay the onset of peak colors and decrease the amount of time they're visible.
"We can see that looking at observations over the past 100 years," Leopold said. "The growing season for trees has shifted. The leaves are coming on or budding sooner."
She said the process of senescence, the scientific word for the end of leaf season, is changing.
Jason Grabosky, a Rutgers professor and tree expert, said it has been a less-than-stellar season for New Jersey residents.
"My experience was that it generally didn't peak as much as it dragged out even to this week in several species," Grabosky said, attributing that to a mild autumn.
With climate change, he said, "some species will be winners, some species will be losers, and we'll move on."
"As species change, colors will change," Grabosky said. "But we don't know how. Ash trees, for example, with the presence of emerald ash borers, will be less present in our canopy. What replaces it will be something new, but we really can't predict that."
He said a warmer fall generally means fewer reds, which leaf peepers seem to enjoy most. Yellows will be the big winners.
"I usually say it's going to be a phenomenally beautiful year depending on where you are standing at the moment. I think it's important that people get outside and appreciate what they do get," Grabosky said. "Try to find the beauty in it. When you think about what's happening, it's really amazing."
"From the Source: Stories of the
Delaware River" is produced with support from the National Geographic
Society, the Lenfest Institute for
Journalism, and the William Penn
Foundation. Editorial content is created independently of the project's donors. This article also is part of Covering Climate Now, a global collaboration of more than 250 news outlets to strengthen coverage of the climate story.fkummer@inquirer.com
215-854-2329
FrankKummer

Load-Date: October 25, 2019


End of Documen
t



The GOP vs. climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 1, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL WEEKLY; Pg. K3
Length: 696 words
Byline: BY AMBER PHILLIPS
Body


Climate change is here. Short of getting rid of the filibuster in the Senate, it will take both parties to agree to start legislating seriously on climate change, and so far that hasn't happened. So will there ever be a tipping point when Republicans will get on board?
There are early signs that, yes, there will be. But maybe not in the near future.
Politico recently reported that a number of GOP lawmakers want to do something about it after years of letting Democrats dominate the issues and conversation, while the New York Times reported Republican strategists are worried the party could lose voters if it doesn't turn around on this issue quickly.
But it will certainly never happen in a Trump administration, say some conservative climate activists. President Trump didn't start the climate change denial movement, but he is its most prominent proponent. His stance that climate change is a "hoax" is in line with his base but incongruent with the majority of Americans, according to Pew Research Center, who think dealing with it should be a top priority for the president.
"It's not an issue Trump seems to have much interest in or sees political advantages in approaching," said Joseph Majkut, the director of climate policy for the right-leaning Niskanen Center think tank.
But set aside Trump, and Republican lawmakers need to realize there is a political constituency to talk about climate change, say conservative climate activists.
When Benji Backer, the president of the 2017 youth-led conservative climate group American Conservation Coalition, talks to lawmakers, he stresses that climate deniers are a small, yet vocal, minority of the party. And he hands them polls that show it's in the top two or three issues for young voters with a warning: "Young people are leaving the Republican Party in droves over this issue."
Various public polling shows that climate change isn't a top issue for the country as a whole; it often ranks below health care, immigration and the economy for voters.
But a February Pew Research survey finds evidence that Republicans of all ages are warming to prioritizing this. Over the past two years, Republicans who think stricter environmental laws are worth the potential economic cost jumped nearly 10 points, to 45 percent.
It's a politically precarious time for conservative lawmakers to even talk about climate policy, given Democrats' marquee climate plan, the Green New Deal, is being weaponized by Trump to signal that Democrats are for too-big government.
"Most Republicans think there is no conservative policy," Backer said, "that climate change is a Trojan horse for big government."
But Majkut says there's a political constituency among Republicans for a carbon tax, even and within the business community and especially within the oil and gas industry. A carbon tax is the holy grail for climate activists, since it's the quickest way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Right now only one Republican is publicly championing such an idea, Rep. Francis Rooney, who represents a coastal district in Florida.
Climate change legislation, like gun control, may seem elusive. But for all of Trump's unhelpful rhetoric on dealing with it, conservative activists point out that Congress under Trump has actually supported tax credits for capturing carbon dioxide in power plants, and the Republican-controlled Senate has held hearings on bills to promote technology to capture and store carbon dioxide. There's a way to legislate on this within the frames of limited government, say conservative climate activists.
"America should reduce emissions through innovation, not punishing government regulations," Sen. John Barrasso (R-Wyo.) said at a February hearing the committee he chairs held on carbon-capture technology.
Backer says it's not so secret anymore that some Republican lawmakers want to legislate on this. Conversations that were happening behind closed doors are starting to be had out in public. He named GOP Sens. Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, Susan Collins of Maine, Thom Tillis of North Carolina and John Cornyn of Texas as leading the Republican conversation to work on bipartisan bills to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Load-Date: September 1, 2019


End of Documen
t



Pope's warning on climate change stirs controversy
The Philadelphia Inquirer
June 14, 2015 Sunday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2015 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: front_page; P-com News Nation-World; Pg. A01
Length: 2105 words
Byline: By David O'Reilly and Tom Avril

Inquirer Staff Writers
Body


On the day he was elected pope, Cardinal Jorge Bergoglio of Argentina stood before a line of his fellow cardinals to receive their blessings. 
 "Don't forget the poor," whispered his Brazilian friend, Cardinal Claudio Hummes, as the two embraced in the Sistine Chapel. And with that, Bergoglio knew the papal name he would choose. 
 "Immediately I thought of St. Francis of Assisi," he later said. "A man of poverty, a man who loved and protected creation."
 To the delight of many around the world - and the consternation of many others - Francis on Thursday will honor his namesake with an encyclical asserting that modern climate change is real, mostly man-made, and of compelling moral concern because global warming is an affliction wrought by wealthy nations with disproportionate impact on the poor.
 While Francis enjoys broad esteem for his commitment to social justice, many American conservatives are openly hostile to assertions that global warming poses a hazard or merits costly remedies.
 Titled "Laudato Si: On the Care of Our Common Home," the encyclical will take its name from a celebrated poem St. Francis wrote in 1225. It will be released Thursday at a news conference in Rome.
 "He's a pope from a developing country who has enormous passion for the poor," said Dan Misleh, executive director of Catholic Climate Covenant, based in Washington. "He wants us to encounter people on the margins and live our faith in service to them. I think that will all be tied into the encyclical."
 Papal biographer Austen Ivereigh, who has discussed the document with several of Francis' advisers, agreed.
 "It will not offer technical solutions" to climate change, Ivereigh said, "because the church is not competent to do so."
 Rather, said Ivereigh, author of The Great Reformer: Francis and the Making of a Radical Pope, "it will be an appeal to religious conscience, to hearts and minds in order to move into action. . . . It will be a call to conversion." 
 Papal encyclicals, typically addressed as letters to the world's Catholic bishops, are regarded as authoritative statements of Catholic teaching but not as infallible.
 The Latin laudato si, meaning "be praised," comes from St. Francis' celebrated poem "Canticle of the Sun," declaring that God is praised by all of creation, including "brother sun" and "sister moon," wind, air, water, fire, and "mother earth."
 The document - with its political implications - will likely stir lively discussion when Francis visits the United States in September.
 After two days in Cuba, he will visit Washington to address Congress on Sept. 24, and New York to address the United Nations on Sept. 25. He then will visit Philadelphia on Sept. 26 and 27 for the Vatican's international World Meeting of Families, with Mass for as many as 1.5 million people on the Benjamin Franklin Parkway. 
 One of Francis' first acts as pontiff was to instruct the Pontifical Council on Peace and Justice to research the issue of climate change for a possible encyclical, Ivereigh said. 
 "It's been on his mind since the very beginning," he said. 
Firm ground 
The Rev. Thomas Reese, former editor of the Jesuit monthly America and author of several books on the Catholic Church, said he anticipates Laudato Si will "accept the scientific consensus that global warming is happening and is due to human activity," and that "environmental issues . . . are moral issues." 
 Scientifically speaking, Francis would be on firm ground. 
 Climate scientists are in near-unanimous agreement that humans have warmed the planet with emissions of heat-trapping "greenhouse gases" such as carbon dioxide, and that more warming and related impacts, such as rising sea levels, are in store.
 Most generally agree, too, that poorer nations are likely to bear a disproportionate share of the impacts of global warming.
 A prime example is Bangladesh, where 12 million people live in an area that is likely to be underwater by century's end, said Princeton University geosciences professor Michael Oppenheimer. This is due in part, he said, to rising sea levels and the sinking of land in that region.
 The concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere has increased from 280 parts per million circa 1800 to about 400 ppm today - driven by the burning of coal, gasoline, and other fossil fuels.
 Average global surface temperatures have climbed about 1.5 degrees Fahrenheit during that period, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the global research organization operating under U.N. auspices. The amount of anticipated future warming is uncertain, depending in part on how aggressively the world cuts emissions.
 The panel's researchers have studied four scenarios. On the low end, with substantial pollution curbs, average global temperatures are projected to rise from half a degree to 3 degrees Fahrenheit by century's end. On the high end, with relatively unchecked emissions growth, average temperatures are expected to rise by 4.7 to 8.6 degrees during that period. 
 Archbishop Pedro Barreto Jimeno of Huancayo, Peru, has predicted Francis' message will meet backlash from those who deny humans are warming the globe. 
 "The encyclical will address the issue of inequality in the distribution of resources, and topics such as the wasting of food and the irresponsible exploitation of nature and the consequences for people's life and health," Jimeno told Catholic News Service.
 "Pope Francis has repeatedly stated that the environment is not only an economic or political issue, but is an anthropological and ethical matter," he said. "How can you have wealth if it comes at the expense of the suffering and death of other people and the deterioration of the environment?"
 Nowhere does skepticism about global warming run deeper than among conservative Americans, said Ivereigh, who is British. 
 Former Sen. Rick Santorum (R., Pa.), a Roman Catholic who has scorned global warming as a liberal hoax, recently told Fox News that the pope and the Catholic Church would be "better off leaving science to the scientists and focusing on what we're really good at, which is theology and morality." 
 (Pope Francis earned a basic chemistry degree and worked as a chemist before entering seminary.)
 "I think there are more pressing problems confronting the Earth than climate change," said Santorum, who is seeking the GOP presidential nomination. His staff did not answer a request for an interview.
 Another vocal skeptic is Sen. James Inhofe (R., Okla.), chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee and author in 2012 of The Greatest Hoax: How the Global Warming Conspiracy Threatens Your Future.
 On a chilly February day, he tossed a snowball on the Senate floor to demonstrate that the Earth was plenty cool, and to convey his contempt for "the hysteria on global warming." 
 A Presbyterian, Inhofe has also decried as "outrageous" the "arrogance of people to think that we human beings would be able to change what [God] is doing in the climate," and said he is doing "God's work" by challenging claims of climate change.
 There is speculation that the pontiff will discuss climate in one or both of his addresses to the U.N. and to Congress, where nearly one-third of the House members and a fourth of the senators are Catholic.
 House Speaker John A. Boehner (R., Ohio), who is Catholic and who invited Francis to address Congress, has said there is evidence that Earth is warming but that he is "not qualified" to decide whether it is the result of human activity.
 "I'll let scientists debate sources and their opinion of that change," he said in January. 
Countries' output 
Even before industrialization, carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases were at work. When sunlight warms Earth, some of the emanating heat is absorbed by these atmospheric gases and then re-emitted back toward Earth, further warming its surface.
 Climate scientists say most of the modern rise in temperature to date can be attributed to the increased output of industrialized nations, as the pope is expected to say. Their relative contributions can be measured in several different ways.
 From 1850 to 2011, the United States emitted more carbon dioxide from burning fossil fuels - for heating, electricity, transportation, and industry - than any other country, with 27 percent of the total, according to World Resources Institute, a Washington-based think tank.
 But in 2008, China began emitting more than the U.S., according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. In 2012, the most recent year available, China put 8.1 billion metric tons of carbon dioxide into the air, compared with 5.3 billion for the U.S.
 The U.S. also does not lead in terms of emissions per capita. It is behind half a dozen Middle Eastern countries, among others, though it is well ahead of European nations, Russia, and China. 
 In short, it's a shared responsibility of the developed world, said Princeton's Oppenheimer, noting that the top 10 countries for annual carbon emissions account for two-thirds of the world's total.
 "You put those countries in a room, and you could solve the problem pretty quickly," he said.
 On Monday, leaders of the world's major industrial democracies, the G7, pledged at a summit in Germany to develop long-term low-carbon strategies and eliminate fossil fuels by century's end.
Unprecedented territory 
Most climate scientists agree that increasing warmth spells extra trouble for agriculture in many poorer nations, such as in sub-Saharan Africa, where it is already warm. Some crops likely will fail unless scientists develop heat-tolerant varieties.
 "We are going into unprecedented territory," said Michela Biasutti, an associate research professor at Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory. "People working on new varieties are going into overdrive. You need a completely new way of thinking about agricultural production."
 Temperatures will rise in richer nations as well, but a key difference is that they have resources to adapt, said Columbia hydrologist and climate scientist Michael Puma.
 Most of sub-Saharan Africa lacks quality irrigation systems, he said.
 Climate scientists also predict that continued warming will affect human health, especially in poorer countries, with intense heat and wildfires. They caution against attributing any one such event to human-induced global warming, but they expect more calamities such as the recent heat wave that has killed 2,500 people in India, with temperatures hitting 118 degrees in some areas.
 In polluted areas, increased heat also can contribute to increased levels of ground-level ozone, a key component of smog. And rising temperatures may contribute to the spread of insect-borne disease in some parts of the world, but scientists say more research is needed.
 While the impact of global warming on rainfall is a matter of debate among climate scientists, Lori Pearson, senior policy adviser for food security and agriculture at Catholic Relief Services, said disrupted rainfall is a cause for worry in most of the 100 poor nations her organization serves. 
 "Subsistence farmers on degraded soils fare the worst" in droughts and dry spells, she said. And when poor soils lack nutrients and don't retain moisture, "crops just wither." 
 Pearson cited a recent study in El Salvador projecting that maize and bean production on its poor soil will drop 32 percent by 2020, but just 1.1 percent on good soil.
 "In the Sahel [mid-northern] region of Africa," where much of the soil is degraded, "farmers tell us the rainy season that used to last five months is now 3.5 months," she said. 
 "It's a vicious circle," Pearson said. "You've got poor people relegated to the poorest land, and they're using traditional farming practices that just deplete the land further. So we see a pattern of environmental degradation very much linked to poverty."
 While previous popes have made that link, Pearson said, she is hopeful that Francis' encyclical will challenge climate change with a force the Catholic Church has never used before, and prove to be the "call to conversion" that some are predicting. 
 "It's an exciting moment for us," she said. "A hopeful moment. 
 INSIDE 
 More carbon emissions, hotter summers. Graphic, A16.
 Rabbis issue a letter on climate change. A17.
 The poem that gives the encyclical its name. A17.
doreilly@phillynews.com
  856-779-3841
Rabbis issue a letter on climate change
http://www.philly.com/philly/news/nation_world/20150614_Rabbis_issue_a_letter_on_climate_change.html
Chaput: Set to be wingman to Pope Francis
http://www.philly.com/philly/news/20150614_Set_to_be_wingman_to_Pope_Francis.html

Load-Date: June 14, 2015


End of Documen
t



Earth Day at 40: From culture change to climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
April 22, 2010 Thursday, CITY-C Edition


Copyright 2010 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; P-com News for PC Home Page; Pg. A01
Length: 1028 words
Byline: By Sandy Bauers

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


Forty years ago, throngs of flower children frolicked in Fairmount Park, playing kazoos and tossing streamers.
Ira Einhorn, the city's self-styled hippie guru who later gained notoriety for murdering his girlfriend, hogged the stage, and poet Allen Ginsberg chanted, "Merrily, merrily, we welcome, we welcome the end of the earth."
The first Earth Day was a party, a polemic, a protest.
This year, Earth Day has no regional signature event.
Instead, Earth Day seems to have become such a part of our DNA that it's happening everywhere. All the time. 
It has morphed into stream cleanups and litter patrols. It has progressed from rolling joints to rolled-up sleeves.
Instead of a gas-mask tour of pollution hot spots, it's Mayor Nutter unveiling 10 new city recycling trucks Thursday - although the murals on them do look a tad psychedelic.
It's a blitz of tree-plantings - 1,000 citywide this Saturday to launch a new initiative. 
Since that first Earth Day, we know what has happened to Earth: The air and water are cleaner, but the planet is hotter.
And what of us? Our species now has far more work to do than anyone imagined.
A new problem has emerged, bigger than all the old ones put together. Scientists say we have a record amount of carbon dioxide in the air, causing spikes in temperatures, more violent storms, melting ice caps.
Climate change could threaten national security and undermine the economy.
The old problems were easy, in a way, because they were so obvious, said Abe Ferdas, a director in the regional office of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency - formed the same year as that first Earth Day.
"You were dealing with black smoke and dirty rivers," he said.
Now, things are much more complicated. And contentious.
Global warming is "the defining issue of our time," said Ed Perry, a retired U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service biologist.
He joined the staff of the National Wildlife Federation in 2005 after going fishing with his sons in the Susquehanna River and seeing hundreds of dead bass floating by, victims of warm-water bacteria.
What Jim Black, an activist with the Clean Air Council, remembers from that first Earth Day is the optimism.
"The problems were huge, but we really felt there was a groundswell of support," he said. "We were going to have the Clean Water Act and the Clean Air Act and the Endangered Species Act" - all passed not long afterward.
But his optimism eventually waned. These days, Black says, he wants to be positive but can't help thinking, " 'We're not going to get there.' " 
There being: "Sustainability, where our society is living in balance with the resources of the planet."
So Earth Day is more relevant than ever. Or should be, environmentalists say.
A cynic might say the day has become too glib, an assault of sound bites and product pitches. Companies are aggressively promoting every "green" gizmo imaginable, from refillable bottles to eco-friendly cat litter.
How much more mainstream - and nauseating - can you get than watching actors from Fox TV's Bones and the American Idol judges dispense eco-tips in a series of network on-air promotions?
Even industry is holding eco-fests, and politicians are piling on, trying to be heard above the overall thrum. 
On Wednesday, Gov. Rendell urged Pennsylvanians to honor the anniversary by taking 40 individual actions.
Vice President Biden had a little more oomph, announcing as part of an Earth Day opening event that Philadelphia is getting $25 million for an energy-efficiency effort aimed at retrofitting buildings. Camden is getting $5 million.
The old turks remember those heady early days of the EPA. They sued cities and stopped sludge barges from dumping in the ocean.
"We were going to save the world," recalled Joseph Manko. In his early 30s - with three children, no less - he left his law firm to become the EPA regional general counsel.
He later formed his own environmental law firm.
As Jim Newsom - now an assistant regional administrator - looks back on his four decades at the EPA, he sees "dramatic change."
Back then, the Delaware River was so polluted and oxygen-deprived that migratory fish couldn't make it upstream past Marcus Hook. "We called it the Marcus Hook sag," he said.
The big change came when Philadelphia built new sewage treatment plants.
As for technology, 40 years ago researchers measured contamination in parts per million. Now, they dice it to parts per quadrillion. It's the difference between tossing a barrel of crud, versus squeezing an eyedropper, into an Olympic swimming pool.
Nevertheless, Newsom said, "what does it mean? How do you interpret it? How clean is clean?"
The Pennsylvania Environmental Council was another product of 1970. A current senior vice president, Patrick Starr, was 12 that first Earth Day. He joined his older brother's Youth Against Pollution to march through Chambersburg and do a mock burial of a car engine. 
"I was raised with the crying Indian commercial on television," he said. "That just ripped at me."
What worries Starr now is our consumptive bent.
Since the first Earth Day, "suburban sprawl engulfed millions of acres of land, destroying open spaces, undermining stream and water quality," he said. "People have chosen to drive many miles to and from work and not use public transit. A lot of things have gone the wrong direction, and you could argue they have a lot to do with affluence."
In 1970, Perry, the retired Fish and Wildlife Service biologist, was at Ohio State, a Vietnam veteran getting a wildlife ecology degree on the GI bill.
"What I think about the first Earth Day - a lot of our country was in an angry mood," he said. Angry about Vietnam. And "angry at what we saw happening to our environment."
He's angry once more because "many of our countrymen are being fooled by people who are denying the existence of climate change."
There have been cleanups, sure, but "I see us turning over a planet to our kids and grandkids in not as good a shape as we received it."
He'll be at an Independence Mall rally Thursday at 11:30 a.m., promoting climate-change legislation.
Contact staff writer Sandy Bauers at 215-854-5147 or sbauers@phillynews.com.
Visit her blog at http://go.philly.com/greenspace 

Graphic

 
Feed Loader

Load-Date: April 22, 2010


End of Documen
t



Jewish group tackles climate change issues
The Philadelphia Inquirer
December 7, 2015 Monday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2015 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: PHILADELPHIA; P-com News; Pg. B01
Length: 1041 words
Byline: By David O'Reilly

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


While many American Jews are committed to social justice issues, climate change is a cause they have been "slow to embrace," a rabbi told a conference in Bala Cynwyd on Sunday.
 "Why is climate change not a Jewish issue?" Rabbi Nina Beth Cardin asked the 40 people gathered at Temple Adath Israel for an afternoon program titled "Protecting Creation."
 The answer might be that many Jews are focused on causes like civil rights, fair labor, the security of Israel, and the needs of the poor and elderly, Cardin proposed.
 "But all these issues will be worsened if we don't get this climate under control," she said, and urged her listeners to become climate activists, too. 
 The program, convened by the Jewish Community Relations Council of the Jewish Federation of Philadelphia along with 18 cosponsors, also featured retired Rear Admiral David W. Titley, a former adviser to the Navy on climate. 
 Titley told his listeners that the urgency of climate change was not about polar bears losing their ice packs. 
 "This is about you and me, our children, our neighbors, town, state, country, and planet," he said. 
 And while Cardin, who serves as the sustainability adviser to the Central Maryland Ecumenical Council, cited scripture to make many of her points, Titley relied heavily on scientific evidence. 
 "How many of you believe in climate change?" he asked. Most hands in the room shot up.
 "I don't believe in it," he told them, to the apparent surprise of many.
 "Belief" is a product of faith and trust, he explained, whereas he is "convinced" by "compelling and overwhelming evidence that our climate is changing." 
 The JCRC convened the conference "not because we're expert," council chairman Dan Segal said before the program started, "but because it's a universal problem that should be addressed Jewishly."
 It was timed to take place during the United Nations' climate change conference in Paris, which ends Friday.
 Judaism has a long commitment to environmental sustainability, Segal added, noting that since ancient times, Jewish farmers have been obliged to let their fields lie fallow every seven years. 
 The Paris conference has settled on a rough blueprint for controlling greenhouse gas emissions that are a leading cause of global warming, the Associated Press reported, but "numerous loopholes and caveats remain," according to National Public Radio. 
 "Many involve how much money the wealthier countries will provide to developing countries to help them adapt to climate change and also lower their own emissions of greenhouse gases," NPR said.
 Cardin echoed some of Segal's ideas in her remarks. 
 "Preserving life is so central to Judaism," she said, but the time has come for mankind to embrace a new way of relating to the earth. 
 "In Genesis, we're told that God told humans . . . to be fruitful and multiply, and have dominion over the Earth," she said. 
 But the days when humans were vulnerable to the power and dangers of the Earth have past. "In the last 15 years, we've reversed that. Now it's the Earth that's vulnerable," Cardin said.
 "What's the solution?" she asked. It can be found in Genesis 2, she said, where Adam and Eve care for the Garden of Eden but must restrain their appetites by not eating from a certain apple tree.
 "We're here to enjoy the riches of the Earth, but in a way that preserves and protects it," she said. 
 Climate change, Titley said, "used to be an issue for environmentalists. Now it's important for issues of national security."
 To grasp the issue at its most elemental level, he continued, "think about how climate is changing water.
 "Water is salty where it used to be fresh, liquid where it used to be solid," said Titley. "We are changing the chemistry of the oceans." 
 Now a professor at Pennsylvania State University and director of its Center for Solutions to Weather and Climate Risk, Titley said his interest in the issue began years ago when the head of the Navy asked him to "find out what the body of evidence said" about global warming and "if we should be worried."
 He concluded there was much cause for concern, he said, and projected several charts on a screen showing the rise of sea level, the weather-related disaster projections of major insurance companies, and a disturbing sequence of images showing how temperatures have been rising around the world since 1884. 
 For a century, the white and green zones depicting cooling and static temperatures shared space with the red showing warming. But starting about 30 years ago, the white and green began to decline, and the red zones grew and grew until, in 2012, nearly all the globe showed warming. 
 Another sequence, using satellite images, showed a rapid decline and near-disappearance of sea ice north of Greenland between 1994 and 2012. "It's not coming back," he said. 
 While the ice flow above Greenland might not hit home to some people, Titley said, climate change could arguably be a factor in the rise of ISIS, the radical, violent Islamic extremist group that has taken over much of Syria and Iraq.
 Syria's longtime dictator, Bashar al-Assad, drained so much of the country's water resources in the 1990s to create agricultural independence for his country, Titley said, that it had nothing to fall back on when a drought began six years ago. 
 As crops failed, hundreds of thousands of farm families poured into Syria's cities just as these were swelling with refugees from the chaos in Iraq. 
 "The [Assad] government was not able to care for them. So what happened? ISIS came along and said 'We'll take care of you.' And by now the people were desperate" for rescue. ISIS attracted thousands of devotees and warriors "and we ended up with this horrific situation.
 "Climate change was not the cause" of it, Titley added, "but it was one of the necessary components, one of the links in the chain."
 Cardin and Titley were followed by Jalonne White-Newsome, a federal policy analyst for WE ACT for Environmental Justice, a New York-based program that monitors the impact of environmental degradation on the poor and minorities. 
 "Climate change can have really bad impacts on folks," she said. "If you take care of the most vulnerable, you're taking care of a lot of people."
doreilly@phillynews.com
  856-779-3841

Graphic

 
Photograph by: MICHAEL BRYANT / Staff Photographer

Load-Date: December 7, 2015


End of Documen
t



On climate-change action, Pa. called 'a lagger'
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 19, 2019 Thursday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1401 words
Byline: Justine McDaniel STAFF WRITER
Body


As the federal government under President Donald Trump has worked to roll back environmental protections and individual states have taken dramatic steps to combat climate change, Pennsylvania this year unveiled a sweeping plan to reduce the state's carbon footprint.
For the first time, the state has a goal for cutting greenhouse gas emissions by 2025 and 2050. The plan the Department of Environmental Protection proposed in April recommends policies and initiatives touching nearly every sector, from energy to transportation to agriculture and beyond. Gov. Tom Wolf says Pennsylvania is making progress.
But what's missing, advocates say, is action. Only a handful of policies have been implemented, and most of the recommendations remain just that.
"It is undoubtedly a dire situation, which our legislature and governor are not reacting to with sufficient urgency," said Rep. Greg Vitali (D., Delaware), the minority chair of the House Environmental Resources and Energy Committee.
Thanks to the energy production industry, carbon emissions from the Keystone State make up about one half of 1% of all carbon emitted globally - more than the vast majority of places on earth, said Tom Richard, director of the Institutes of Energy and the Environment at Pennsylvania State University. That's even after emissions fell in recent years, and the state projects they will not fall much further without aggressive action.
New Jersey, New York, California, and Washington are among the states that have enacted major policy to bring carbon emissions down, working in line with international goals. But Pennsylvania - with a politically divided state government that has passed fewer and fewer new laws in recent years - has straggled behind that club of fastest-advancing states.
"Right now, the truth is, Pennsylvania's a lagger. It's not a leader," said John Hanger, the DEP secretary during Gov. Ed Rendell's administration who later served as Wolf's policy director. "Could it be a leader? Yes. Should it be a leader? Yes. But what would be required to move from lagger to leader? Cooperation between the governor and the legislature, and some bipartisanship."
'Turning the aircraft carrier'
The planet is experiencing a rapid warming caused by high levels of greenhouse gases spewing into the atmosphere from the burning of fossil fuels, like coal and oil, to generate energy. The warming - Pennsylvania itself has already warmed 1 degree Celsius, according to scientific research - has set off dire environmental consequences.
Scientists predict food shortages, wildfires, coastline destruction, intensified droughts, and worsening poverty as soon as 2040 unless global emissions are reduced. Pennsylvania has already seen more rainfall, higher flood risk, and warmer winters, said Richard.
Wolf and his officials say the state has made gains on issues including solar power, energy efficiency, and electric vehicles. On Tuesday, Wolf pledged by the end of the year to move forward tighter regulations of methane emissions from gas wells.
Orchestrating a statewide response to climate change is like "turning the aircraft carrier," but the state is moving in the right direction, said current DEP Secretary Patrick McDonnell.
"Gov. Wolf has noted repeatedly that climate change is the most significant environmental threat facing the world, and we are taking steps across state government commensurate with that level of urgency," said J.J. Abbott, a spokesperson for the governor.
In January, Wolf issued an executive order setting climate goals and establishing a council for improving the state government's carbon footprint. The state estimates that many strategies in its Climate Action Plan would save money while others require "significant" spending but would have long-term benefits. Reducing emissions could also create 40,000 jobs and grow the state's economy by $4 billion, according to the state's report.
But with a Republican-majority legislature, a Democratic governor, and a lack of bipartisan agreement, the plan is far from reality.
The DEP's Climate Action Plan "does lay out some paths forward, but I don't know that it gets us anywhere near where we need to be," said Joe Minott, executive director of the Clean Air Council, a Philadelphiabased advocacy group. "We're not seeing the type of action that I think we would want to see from the governor."
State action on climate change is critical not only because the federal government has abandoned the issue but because state and local governments have authority over public utilities, land use, transit, and more, said Vicki Arroyo, executive director of the Georgetown Climate Center, which works with states on climate policy.
"Where the rubber hits the road is once you've made these commitments, how do you actually take the steps to reduce your emissions in line with those commitments?" Arroyo said.
New Jersey endured a similar partisan stalemate on climate-change policies between the Democratic-led legislature and Republican Gov. Chris Christie during his tenure. Since the election of Gov. Phil Murphy, a Democrat, the state has moved to rejoin the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative and has passed legislation moving toward its 2050 reduction goal. Maryland passed a renewable energy bill with a Democratic legislature and Republican governor. But in Oregon, the Democratic governor's attempt at passing a climate-change bill in June was stymied by Republican lawmakers fleeing the state to prevent a vote.
New York's legislature this year passed one of the most aggressive plans in the world. And California has been a national pioneer in climate-change policy, meeting its 2020 emissions goals four years early. The state has also regularly sparred with Trump; on Wednesday, the president said he was revoking the authority that has allowed California to have stricter auto-pollution regulations.
'Existential threat'
Nine of Pennsylvania's Northeastern neighbors are cutting greenhouse gas emissions through the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative. Wolf believes it would be "ideal" for Pennsylvania to join RGGI, but is waiting to hear whether the legislature wants to collaborate before examining other options, his spokesperson said.
Democrats said the chance of passing climate-related bills in Pennsylvania before the two-year legislature term ends in late 2020 is slight. "There's no sign that Republican leaders have any interest," said House Democratic caucus spokesperson Bill Patton.
A spokesperson for the House Republican caucus said majority lawmakers are focused on a package of bills, dubbed Energize PA, that aim to expand natural gas infrastructure, which has helped Pennsylvania reduce emissions by replacing lessclean coal - but did not say the party plans to move any other environmental measures.
"We believe the responsible expansion of natural gas energy production is key to continuing to reduce CO2 emissions in Pennsylvania," said Mike Straub, the caucus' spokesperson, adding that other zerocarbon methods such as nuclear power should also be used.
Environmental advocates say that because gas-powered energy production still emits carbon, it isn't a good way to reduce carbon emissions. Democratic lawmakers want to pass a bill expanding renewable energy.
McDonnell, the head of the DEP, said the state should pick up its pace but said he believes it is "absolutely" possible for Pennsylvania to reach its emissions reduction goal. "We produce energy, that's what we do. So being able to figure out how we do that in a way that reduces that climate footprint is a challenge we believe we're up to," he said.
Among the steps Pennsylvania has taken are updating building codes, which is projected to save 25% in energy usage and costs; installing electric car charging stations at state parks, and promoting the state's electric car rebate program; funding new solar projects and implementing policies to increase solar energy generated here; and planning some clean energy transportation projects, according to the governor's office.
"It's not a partisan issue," said Pennsylvania Attorney General Josh Shapiro, who with other attorneys general has sued the Trump administration's Environmental Protection Agency various times over loosening environmental regulations. "It is an existential threat that is something we have a responsibility to deal with right now." jmcdaniel@inquirer.com
215-854-4549 McDanielJustine

Load-Date: September 19, 2019


End of Documen
t



As waters rise, still denying the undeniable; From Daryl Metcalfe in Pennsylvania to Mike Lee in Utah, there are many leaders still not serious about climate change.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 31, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: CURRENTS; Pg. C3
Length: 865 words
Byline: WILL BUNCH
Body


ABSTRACT
From Daryl Metcalfe in Pennsylvania to Mike Lee in Utah, there are many leaders still not serious about climate change.
Nebraska's Republican governor, Pete Ricketts, ran for the job in 2014 declaring that "I believe it is far from clear - despite what the other side is saying - it is far from clear what is going on with our climate." Just this January, Ricketts openly snubbed the novelist chosen for the "2019 One Book, One Nebraska" event because of the author's activism around climate and related issues like the Keystone XL pipeline.
Then the "bomb cyclone" struck.
Pelted by high winds and a week of near-biblical rainfall that melted snow and then cascaded across prairies frozen by the long winter, Nebraska has this month suffered at least $1.4 billion in flood and related damage. The rising rivers knocked down bridges, crumbled critical roadways, and destroyed 2,000 homes while crippling a strategically important U.S. Air Force base. Hardest hit were Nebraska's farmers, who lost cattle and suffered crop damage to the tune of more than $800 million.
And that's how the Midwestern "bomb cyclone" became a day of reckoning for Republican ... ha ha, almost had you going there, didn't I? In response to the growing evidence, from Nebraska to Mozambique, of the destructive and often deadly power of storms intensified by climate change, GOP lawmakers and leaders are doubling down - not just on the cynical nothingness of climate denial but on their dream that opposing not just environmentalism but basic science will be a winning strategy at the polls in 2020.
In the Pennsylvania legislature, ultraconservative GOP Rep. Daryl Metcalfe - skeptical that man-made greenhouse-gas pollution is causing climate change, and calling proposals to curb that pollution a plot by "leftists" - was in January given the critical job of chairing the House Environmental and Energy Resources Committee. So far, Metcalfe is using his new platform to push a pro-industry agenda - waging war against a proposed fracking ban by the Delaware River Basin Commission - and also to give a platform to skeptics opposing established climate science.
On Wednesday, Metcalfe chaired an unusual hearing on climate change with only one witness - Gregory Wrightstone, a geologist (i.e., not a climatologist) and natural-gas consultant who self-publishes popular books expressing his deep skepticism about the widely accepted science of planetary warming. Metcalfe said the hearing's goal was to "debunk some of the myths that are out there in the public right now." His committee so far hasn't called actual experts on climate, like Penn State's Michael Mann, who have warned of worsening storms, drought, and other severe impacts if humans don't curb greenhouse-gas pollution.
"Basically what we have is a major Republican chairman, Daryl Metcalfe, who believes climate change isn't real - and he's using his position as a major chairman to spread that belief system," Rep. Leanne Krueger, Delaware County Democrat and a committee member, told me. Krueger and other Democrats like Philadelphia newcomer Rep. Elizabeth Fiedler pressed Wrightstone on the fact that his books have not been peer-reviewed by other scientists, and his affiliation with the fossil-fuel-funded Heartland Institute. Krueger said Democrats hope to call actual experts later in the session.Gov. Tom Wolf also weighed in with a tweet that called Metcalfe's hearing "a waste of time."
But that's the tragedy. Earlier this year, aU.N. panel warned that the world has just 11 years, or until 2030, to bring carbon pollution under control or face the worst consequences of global warming. Pennsylvania - which by the way, produces 1 percent of the world's greenhouse-gas pollution - is about to waste two of those years with Metcalfe's buffoonery.
Can things get any worse? Of course they can. In Washington, not only do we have a climate skeptic in the White House naming fossil-fuel lobbyists to key environmental posts, but a Congress that - like Harrisburg - is locked into two more years of delaying climate action. Last week in the U.S. Senate, Republican Majority Leader Mitch McConnell brought up the Green New Deal - a broad blueprint that aims for the U.S. to meet those 2030 climate goals - not so much to seriously debate it but to mock it.
Indeed, Pennsylvania's Metcalfe turned out not even to be the week's biggest climate buffoon. That trophy goes to Utah Sen. (and hero of the tea party era) Mike Lee, whose rejoinder to the Green New Deal was that Americans can fight climate change by falling in love and having "more babies," and then mocking environmentalists with a cartoon showing Ronald Reagan firing a machine gun while riding a Velociraptor.
I'm old enough to remember when Republicans (and Democrats) fought for the future of Nebraska farmers - before the Fox News era when politics became all about destroying the planet to own the libs, while rewarding their Big Oil and Gas Donors. Or about "making babies" who'll grow into a future that will be a lot more perilous, thanks to the nihilistic cynicism of Pete Ricketts, Mike Lee, and Pennsylvania's own Daryl Metcalfe. bunchw@phillynews.com
215-854-2957 will_bunch

Load-Date: March 31, 2019


End of Documen
t



Pa. farmer says we can all fight climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
October 12, 2018 Friday


Copyright 2018 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A14
Length: 689 words
Byline: Kirstie Jones
Body


The United Nations' recent report on climate change is about as loud of an alarm bell that can be sounded about the dire consequences of rising global temperatures. With its extremely short window of time for addressing the problem, the report makes clear that climate change is happening at breakneck speed.
This should not come as a surprise to those of us living in the Mid-Atlantic region, where we have been plagued by extreme rain and rising temperatures. According to the National Weather Service, so far this year almost half of Pennsylvania's counties have received precipitation totals more than 50 percent above average. Although it is difficult to attribute specific weather events to climate change, the high levels of precipitation we have seen are in line with predictions about how climate change is expected to impact our area.
Between 1958 and 2012, the Environmental Protection Agency documented a 70 percent increase in heavy precipitation events in the Northeast and has forecast that the frequency of these events is likely to further increase.
As a 27-year-old farm manager of a 13-acre organic farm in Horsham, I have experienced firsthand the challenges brought by this extreme weather. For vegetable farmers in the Northeast, increasingly intense rain in recent years has led to field flooding, crop loss, high weed pressure, and disease spread, problems that have been especially acute for organic growers not using synthetic fungicides and herbicides.
It is undeniable that organic farms are part of the solution to climate change; the healthy soils created by sustainable agriculture can actually serve as a carbon sink, and by default local organic produce has a much lower carbon footprint than food shipped across the country from California.
However, many of the same farms that have the potential to work against climate change are also greatly affected by the consequences of extreme weather. For example, in the fall, organic farmers usually plant their fields with cover crops made up of dense stands of grasses and legumes that replenish soil nutrition and pull carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Unfortunately, this year intense rain events have made it difficult for many of us in the Mid-Atlantic region to turn over our fields and plant beneficial cover crops in time for winter. As we have seen many times this season, the effects of even one rainstorm can be felt months later, resulting in yield losses, late planting, and decreased productivity.
It is now more important than ever that we are aware of these and the many other effects climate change is having in our region, considering that the federal government is unwilling to recognize how critical the situation has become.
Recently, the Trump administration used predictions from a recent environmental impact statement projecting a 7-degree global warming by 2100 as justification for freezing federal fuel-efficiency standards. This is another blow in a long line of moves the administration has made to back down from climate action in the past few months, including weakening the rules for methane emissions and CO2 pollution from coal-powered plants.
It is imperative to prioritize climate-change action on both the personal and state level. Although it may feel that as individuals, we have little hope of making an impact, there are still actions that can help to move us in a positive direction. One of these, of course, is to support local organic farms. We also must ensure that Pennsylvania continues to be a leader in climate-change progress by choosing candidates in November that are committed to tackling this issue on both a state and federal level.
Despite the Trump administration's blatant refusal to create meaningful climate policy, Pennsylvanians and their representatives in government still have the power to make decisions that can prevent us from reaching the tipping point in 2030. According to the U.N., we have just 12 years until the world is drastically changed. This information does not call for paralysis but immediate and continuous action from all of us.
Kirstie Jones is a farmer in suburban Pennsylvania.

Load-Date: October 12, 2018


End of Documen
t



Wolf has a choice to make on climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
July 24, 2020 Friday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A13
Length: 836 words
Byline: Nadia Steinzor
Body


Gov. Tom Wolf has a choice to make about oil and gas in Pennsylvania: either lead on climate or pursue political expediency at the cost of his climate legacy and the health of Pennsylvanians he's sworn to protect.
Gov. Wolf has made environmental and public health strides, including committing Pennsylvania to the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI), adopting some air pollution standards for new oil and gas operations, and proposing similar controls for existing ones.
But the governor can't seem to grasp that climate catastrophe will not be averted by half-measures. Climate policy is like COVID policy: It only works if you're proactive, focused, consistent, and comprehensive.
Lately, the governor has failed in this regard. Last month, Attorney General Josh Shapiro released a scathing report on the criminal harms caused by the oil and gas industry, and the systemic failure of state agencies to prevent them. Yet, instead of supporting a report from a high-ranking state official charged with law enforcement, Wolf administration officials attacked the report, insisting that oil and gas industry oversight has improved and harms are now being avoided.
Then last week, the governor voiced his support for a bill that would give away millions of taxpayer dollars for the reckless expansion of polluting plastic plants and other oil and gas projects - and sent his executive director of the Office of Energy, Denise Brinley, to a virtual industry event. One plastics plant, the Beaver County Shell facility, is already permitted to pollute the equivalent of adding 400,000 cars to state roadways.
When it comes to climate and the gas industry, the governor is fond of saying he's not an "eitheror" guy. He thinks we can allow this industry to continue expanding without honestly reckoning with its environmental impacts. That makes him remarkably similar to other governors in relation to climate, and some even on COVID: publicly declaring their desire to limit spread while not taking meaningful steps to actually do so.
Gov. Wolf's approach to the climate and health emergencies created by the oil and gas industry is especially surprising compared with his handling of the COVID pandemic. He has rightfully deferred to public health professionals and experts, balancing economic concerns, but prioritizing public health and safety.
He should take a similar approach to the climate crisis.
The science is clear. Pennsylvania and the rest of the world have until 2030 to cut climate pollution in half to avoid climate catastrophe, and the fossil fuel industry is primarily responsible for growing greenhouse gas levels in the United States. Since Pennsylvania is the second-largest producer of natural gas in the country, decisions made here play an outsized role. Gov. Wolf seemed to recognize this when he made climate commitments to cut greenhouse gas emissions in the commonwealth by a quarter by 2025.
But we can't get there by equivocating on methane pollution and the oil and gas expansion that is the leading cause of it. Methane is a greenhouse gas 86 times worse for climate than carbon dioxide. Every step of the oil and gas supply chain emits it. Every year, Pennsylvania's 1.1 million tons of methane emitted from gas operations carry the climate impact of more than 5.4 million cars, using the most conservative estimates.
While the most disastrous consequences of the climate crisis are yet to come, oil and gas pollution is hurting Pennsylvanians right this minute. One in seven state residents live within a half-mile of oil and gas operations, which many studies show elevates threats to their health, including risk of fetal defects, respiratory issues, headaches, nose bleeds, and dizziness.
My organization, Earthworks, documents visual proof of this pollution at oil and gas sites across the state, using the same technology and training as the industry and Department of Environmental Protection inspectors. We have released reports showing that the current system of regulations and enforcement are simply unable to safeguard health and the environment.
If Gov. Wolf cares about his climate legacy, he's not showing it. But it's not too late for him to reverse course.
The administration still has time to strengthen oil and gas pollution control rules by removing loopholes for tens of thousands of "low-producing" wells so they cover all polluters and maintain standards over time. There's still an opportunity to publicly accept the attorney general's findings. And now is the perfect time to halt the issuance of oil and gas permits until new policies are adopted to reduce harm, and state agencies have the resources and commitment necessary to protect Pennsylvanians.
There certainly isn't time for more half-measures and contradictions from Gov. Wolf. We need real action on climate and health.
Nadia Steinzor is Earthworks's community empowerment project manager and the author of multiple studies of the state's regulatory failure to protect Pennsylvanians from oil and gas pollution.

Load-Date: July 24, 2020


End of Documen
t



Five reasons Harvey has been so destructive - it's not only about climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 1, 2017 Friday, WEB Edition


Copyright 2017 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: WEB; P-com Health Environment; Pg. WEB
Length: 1488 words
Byline: Frank Kummer
Body


As scientists, engineers, and victims of Harvey try to grasp exactly how a storm got that big and destructive, some say that there might never be one answer   but that climate change, sea rise, sprawl, and randomness all converged with a vengeance on Houston.
 They are mysterious unto themselves,  William Sweet, a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration oceanographer, said of storms like Harvey and Sandy.
 Climate change aside, rare events happen,  Sweet says.  Oftentimes it s not very well understood that your area might be prone to these major events. Just because you haven t seen a storm like it in 30, 50 years doesn t mean they aren t prone to occur. If your region is prone to these kind of events, you need to be prepared. 
So what are the factors suspected of making Harvey especially awful?Sea-level rise
Most people think of sea-level rise as a component of climate change: Melting glaciers empty into the ocean and raise the sea level. But that s only partly correct. A portion of sea-level rise comes from what s known as subsidence   sinking land. Scientists consider more water from the oceans and subsidence when they look at sea-level rise for an area.
Subsidence is often caused by humans. Drilling for water and oil can contribute. Drawing large amounts of water from the ground causes certain types of rocks, such as fine-grained sediments, to compact. Subsidence is nearly irreversible. Subsidence has been a problem in the Houston area, which draws groundwater from three aquifers for municipal and commercial water supplies.
Drilling also lowers the ocean floor. However, that lowering is filled by the Gulf of Mexico waters and not create a noticeable  draw down  of the Gulf, though the land lowering would still be present.  In other words, the ocean fills up the lowered ocean floor without offset, according to Sweet.
So, Houston not only has sinking land but more water in the Gulf Coast. That means overall sea rise is greater.
Indeed, sea rise is accelerating globally, adding about 8 to 9 inches since 1880 to the oceans. And scientists say sea levels rose at a faster rate in the 20th century than in any other century during the last 2,800 years.
The Insurance Journal took note of rising seas and their potential impact on Houston as recently as May, stating,  The rate of sea-level rise even under the lowest projection would increase the chances of severe flooding on the Texas Gulf Coast from storm surges or other causes from once every five years to once every two years by 2030 under the extreme projection, and 2060 under the low prediction. 
A NOAA report from this yearsingled out the region that includes the New Jersey Shore in addition to Texas:
 Along regions of the Northeast Atlantic (Virginia coast and northward) and the western Gulf of Mexico coasts, sea level rise is projected to be greater than the global average for almost all future   rise scenarios. Warmer waters
As Harvey moved toward Texas, water in the Gulf of Mexico was nearly two degrees warmer than normal for this time of year, according to Weather Underground.
Warmer water is fuel for hurricanes.
Michael Mann, a prominent climate scientist at Pennsylvania State University, wrote on Facebook that warmer waters accounted for about 3 percent to 5 percent more moisture in the atmosphere. That contributed to the record 52 inches of rain, the most destructive force of all from Harvey.
 Not only are the surface waters of the Gulf unusually warm right now, but there is a deep layer of warm water that Harvey was able to feed upon when it intensified at near-record pace as it neared the coast,  he said.  Human-caused warming is penetrating down into the ocean, warming not just the surface but creating deeper layers of warm water in the Gulf and elsewhere. 
He added that Harvey may be part of a destructive phenomenon  favored  by climate change: weather anomalies that remain nearly locked in place for days. Harvey stalled over the coast and inland, retreating, then striking the coast again, adding to the rainfall and the misery.
 In conclusion, while we cannot say climate change `caused  Hurricane Harvey (that is an ill-posed question), we can say that it exacerbated several characteristics of the storm in a way that greatly increased the risk of damage and loss of life,  Mann wrote.
Kenneth Kunkel of NOAA s Cooperative Institute for Climate and Satellites in Asheville, N.C., said the waters had been running warmer for months   as they have in most of the Northern Hemisphere.
 We can tie that pretty strongly to global warming and greenhouse gases in the atmosphere,  he said.
Worse for Houston residents, the air was so moist that the storm had  this virtually unlimited supply of fuel. Storm surge
One of the reasons Hurricane Sandy caused so much damage in 2012 along the East Coast was because of the tides.
Before October 2012, the highest water level recordedat Sandy Hook, N.J., was 4.86 feet above what s considered normally dry land. During Sandy, the water level reached 8.01 feet   and then a gauge was destroyed, making further measurements impossible.
Sandy dropped about 10 inches of rain near some parts of the coast, and that rain persisted during high tides, the worse possible time. At least seven feet of that record-high water level came from tidal surge.
The impacts of tides are not as great at Galveston Bay, but they are there. The highest water levels recorded during Harveywere at Manchester, which is next to Houston, at 9.33 feet. That figure includes storm surge, rainfall runoff, waves, and other non-tidal influence.
So, in Sandy there was much less rainfall but much greater impact from tides. In Harvey, there was much greater rainfall and might have been less impact from tides, but they still contributed.
The combination had a powerful effect. The Pine Island Bayou, part of a drainage network north and east of Houston, reaches flood stage at 25 feet, and major flood stage at 32 feet, according National Weather Service data. On Wednesday it reached 39.42 feet. All that water has to go somewhere.Unchecked sprawl
Houston was the fastest-growing city in the United States as of 2015, according to census figures, leading to dire warnings about what that means for flood control. The Houston Chronicle ran a five-part series on the issue last year.
 In the greater Houston area   the staggering increase of impervious surfaces   roads, sidewalks, parking lots, anything covered with asphalt and concrete   has exacerbated the effects of flooding as development in the region has exploded,  one article said.  When land is covered by these surfaces, it loses ability to act like a sponge and soak up water. Things are further complicated in flat-as-a-pancake Houston, where much of the soil is heavily compacted and acts like pavement anyway, sending sheets of stormwater to the nearest low-lying area. 
The article said that more than 337,000 of the 1.1 million acres in Harris County were covered by impervious surfaces in 2011. Developers rely on manmade ponds to hold runoff created by roads and concrete surfaces. But the ponds merely hold water instead of letting it be absorbed into soil.
In other areas they depend on levees, normally earthen dams, and bayous.
The Texas Tribune and ProPublica also teamed up with a project that had dire predictions for the unchecked growth and its impact on potential flooding if a Hurricane struck the Houston area.Randomness of Mother Nature
Harvey stalled largely because it got stuck between two high-pressure areas pushing it in opposite directions. Those fronts themselves became stuck and, Kunkel said,  had no net force to move it. 
Meteorologists and climate scientists will spend weeks or months to perform calculations that could indicate climate change was a factor in heightening Harvey. Their work will likely be reviewed and checked by other scientists for years.
 Will these kind of storms become more intense and frequent? The model is mixed,  Sweet said.  But one thing is certain: Sea levels are continuing to rise and at more than the historical record.  
Graphic: If Harvey's Rain Fell in Philadelphia
http://www.philly.com/philly/infographics/442265843.html
Why Harvey's assault on Texas couldn't happen here
http://www.philly.com/philly/news/weather/harvey-rain-shore-philadelphia-labor-day-weekend-20170830.html
Former Inquirer editor in Houston: Global warming caused Harvey's devastating floods | Opinion
http://www.philly.com/philly/opinion/commentary/hurricane-harvey-houston-flooding-climate-change-vernon-loeb-20170830.html
Why development more than climate change caused Houston's flooding
http://www.philly.com/philly/opinion/editorials/houston-flooding-climate-change-hurricane-harvey-20170830.html
How 'Wild West' growth may have contributed to devastating flood in Houston
http://www.philly.com/philly/news/nation_world/how-wild-west-growth-may-have-contributed-to-devastating-flood-in-houston-20170830.html

Graphic

 
Photograph by: DAVID J. PHILLIP / AP

Load-Date: September 1, 2017


End of Documen
t



Public's voice needed for climate-change action
The Philadelphia Inquirer
December 19, 2018 Wednesday


Copyright 2018 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A14
Length: 773 words
Byline: Vinod Thomas
Body


No global trend presents a greater local threat in the United States than climate change. Yet the gulf between scientists' warnings about climate catastrophes and the U.S. government's inaction to abate carbon emissions has never been greater. Many politicians act as if the climate threat lies well over the horizon, while climate science tells us otherwise - as do 2018's epic fires and storms in the U.S. Urgently needed in Pennsylvania and across the country is a transition to a clean-energy economy, and to underpin such action, a people's movement that becomes an unstoppable force spurring political, economic, and technical responses.
To generate this movement, mindsets must change. The media are amply covering climate change these days. But in looking at the dire predictions, many feel that their efforts today won't make a difference, or that problems will in time get resolved anyway. This is dangerous because climate damages will be irreversible in a process that has already started.
Pennsylvania is at the front end of climate impacts both as a victim and as a contributor to the problem. On the one side, sea level rise around Philadelphia has accelerated in recent decades making for a one foot sea rise over the last century, which could triple by the end of this century. Temperatures in the U.S. have increased by 0.435 degrees per decade since 1970, and Philadelphia is estimated to be the 17th fastest-warming U.S. city. On the other side, in 2015, Pennsylvania's economy ranked third in the U.S. in terms of the total CO2 emissions emitted. In per capita terms, Pennsylvania's CO2 emissions are more than twice those of New York state.
To inculcate a sense of urgency, everyone needs to see how the climate and energy dots connect. The United Nations report in October and the U.S. government's National Climate Assessment in November could not be clearer about the links among human-induced greenhouse gas emissions, atmospheric warming, and a rise in extreme weather disasters. Importantly, scientists are starting to attribute global warming to the probability of the occurrence of individual events, such as Hurricane Harvey in Houston and Southeast Texas in 2017 and Hurricane Sandy in New Jersey and the Eastern Seaboard in 2012.
The world's leading scientists have urged that we get global emissions to peak by 2020, and then fall sharply in order to keep temperature rise to below 2 degrees centigrade, ideally even 1.5. But the prospects of meeting that goal are dimming fast. A just-released report from the Global Carbon Pact reveals that global carbon emissions were at an all-time high in 2018, due to increases in coal use and in automobile numbers. Carbon emissions are estimated to rise in 2018, including in the top three emitters, China, the U.S., and India. The major carbon-emitting countries need to make profound changes to their economies. China's carbon emissions continue to rise, even as the county is making progress on renewable energy. The U.S. administration gutted its climate-care policies this year, replacing them with fossil-fuel friendly actions that could see a vast increase in carbon emissions in the coming decades.
Meanwhile, there are examples of state and local governments initiating policy and technology solutions for reducing carbon intensity. A2018 law in California requires that all its electricity be generated by renewable energy and no carbon sources in 25 years. Philadelphia Mayor Kenney has proposed to cut carbon emissions 80 percent from 2006 levels by 2050, using more energy from renewable sources, stepping up energy-efficiency programs, and developing an energy system resilient to climate change. Pennsylvania Gov. Wolf has indicated that he wants to get 10 percent of the state's power from solar energy by 2030.
But the good examples must be scaled up, and that requires a groundswell of public and political support. After all, public opinion and political support were important drivers of the efforts that changed the tide in many other crisis situations, including counter-terrorism in the 1970s and after 9/11. The role of public opinion is also clear looking at campaigns, such as vaccination, against pandemics. And when it comes to the climate crisis, we need a clear articulation of the direct link between carbon emissions and climate catastrophes, and of its deadly impacts here and now.
Pennsylvania's stakes in climate action are high, worthy of a people's movement behind radical change.
Vinod Thomas is author of "Climate Change and Natural Disaster"
(Routledge, 2018) and former senior vice president at the World Bank.Vndthomas91@yahoo.com

Load-Date: December 19, 2018


End of Documen
t



Phila. airport in the crosshairs; A planned expansion is being designed with climate change in mind.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 22, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1253 words
Byline: Frank Kummer STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
A planned expansion is being designed with climate change in mind.
Ray Scheinfeld parked the bright-yellow SUV he uses for his work as environmental manager for Philadelphia International Airport on a grassy hill and looked north to what few passengers ever see: the runways and tower used for cargo transport.
Then, he pivoted east toward the nearby Delaware River.
"We'll have to build up," Scheinfeld said, referring to the airport's planned expansion on 152 acres purchased in the last few years. "It's absolutely being designed with climate change in mind."
Built on what used to be a network of islands in the Delaware River, the airport, a vital economic engine, is one of the city's most vulnerable areas to the combined effects of higher seas and heavier storms, Philadelphia officials say. Moving it isn't viable, so officials are looking to build up.
The airport is located just off the river, part of a tidal estuary that flows to the Atlantic Ocean, and so as the ocean continues to rise, the Delaware will follow.
In the 20th century, sea level rose by 12 inches in Philadelphia, according to research by Rutgers University's Institute of Marine and Coastal Sciences.
No one has a crystal ball, but scientists agree that sea-level rise, combined with more extreme weather, will have an impact in the coming decades, especially on low-lying areas such as the airport.
Estimates of sea-level rise over the next 40 years range from 1.2 feet to more than 4.5 feet by 2060, depending on how much carbon dioxide continues to be pumped into the environment by power plants and motor vehicles, according to the Delaware River Basin Commission.
Scheinfeld leans on the conservative side, using data showing a rise of about a foot to a maximum of 2.5 feet based on the Delaware Geological Survey.
The airport, spread across the islands, with Hog Island probably the best known, is built on silt and sludge, and is a key focus of the city's climate-change plans. The city owns the airport, with its seven terminals and four runways spread over 2,598 acres - much in a federally designated floodplain.
More than 30 million passengers fly in or out of the airport each year in 420,000 takeoffs and landings. A half-dozen cargo carriers move 500,000 tons of freight and mail.
"We have a new area we are planning on 150 acres for a west cargo development zone," Scheinfeld said. "And we would like to bring in more air cargo. As we build new infrastructure, we have to make sure ground elevation is minimum of two feet above the current flood standards."
The meadow where Scheinfeld stood overlooking the Delaware is part of the acreage - some of it wetlands - the airport has purchased in a bid to become a bustling shipping hub for everything from medicine to car parts.
The Henderson Tract, the largest parcel, sprawls 135 acres - similar in size to the entire King of Prussia Mall and its parking lots - to the immediate west of the passenger terminals. The new cargo hub could mean billions in business now lost to Baltimore, Washington, New York, and Newark, N.J.
Scheinfeld said he is working with the Federal Aviation Administration to ensure the plans take into account both climate change and extreme weather. But the city is not looking at just a few feet of sea rise - it's also considering what would happen if a massive storm hits on top of that. In 2015, Philadelphia laid out its vision in its Growing Stronger Toward a Climate Ready Philadelphia report, which is being updated.
The report said that the airport "and at least a dozen other city facilities would be exposed to flooding with two feet of sea level rise, a scenario that is likely to occur by midcentury."
The airport, much of it elevated above the land's natural state by dredge spoils over the decades, ranges from four to 25 feet above sea level. One runway is about 30 feet above sea level. Most of the terminals are about 15 feet above sea level. The airport drains into the Delaware River and the Schuylkill, and Darby Creek.
But a federal report says Philadelphia has one runway with an elevation of just 8.3 feet, putting it at risk during even a moderate storm surge.
'How are we going to deal with this?'
ICF, an international climatechange consulting firm hired by the city, found that with only two feet of sea-level rise, parts of the airport would be inundated if it were struck by the equivalent of the largest storm ever recorded in Philadelphia, a Category 1 hurricane in 1903.
But Scheinfeld a geologist, said he has a far more recent precedent as a guide: July 28, 2013, when a thunderstorm dumped 8.26 inches of rain, most of it in just four hours. That easily surpassed the previous record for a single day, 6.6 inches, when Hurricane Floyd hit 20 years ago this month.
"It was one of those thunderstorm cells that just sat there for a while and presented some very interesting problems," Scheinfeld recalled of the 2013 storm. "It knocked out all of our power for Terminal A East. We had 12 flights canceled. It caused our baggage system in Terminal A East to stop operating. And it really drove a lot of people here to say: How are we going to deal with this in the future?"
Two underground electrical substations flooded with 28 inches of water. Pumps failed from the strain. Flights that weren't canceled had to be delayed.
At the time, July normally saw a total of 4.35 inches of rain. In 2013, 13.24 inches fell that July. The storm and the month may be an outlier, but it keeps with a trend: This decade is the wettest decade ever, measured by 10-year rainfall averages at the airport. Additionally, the average annual rainfall for the 21st century through 2018 (49.4 inches) is more than 8 inches higher than the 20th-century average.
The airport installed metal barriers that can be raised to cover doors to the substation during floods. It upgraded pumps. It installed redundant systems.
But Scheinfeld said water isn't the only challenge climate change presents. High heat makes jet engines less efficient. It can even buckle tarmac, as Phoenix has discovered.
Costly and damaging
Solutions to climate change-related consequences tend to be costly and even unpalatable - such as the flood walls and barriers that might protect the New Jersey coast, but could prove unsightly and environmentally damaging.
Likewise, the airport's plan to raise the ground because of climate change concerns Fred Stine of the Delaware Riverkeeper Network. Stine said his organization understands what the airport faces, but objects to the new cargo area.
"One of the things we're just starting to battle is the airport expansion," he said. "They are getting ready to fill 135 acres of floodplain and they are building 11 acres on storm-water basins."
Stine said that will mean the loss of the area's ability to absorb floodwaters and could cause issues in neighboring Tinicum Township and other floodprone areas of Philadelphia such as Eastwick. Building up the terrain also could affect wildlife.
"It will directly and indirectly impact the Long Horn and Lower Darby creeks and the Delaware River," his group wrote in comments to the FAA. "It will dramatically reduce the flood absorption and storage capabilities in this localized area."
Scheinfeld says he understands those concerns, as well as other objections he's heard over the years about helping manage an airport built in a flood zone.
"I've heard people say maybe we should put the airport someplace else," Scheinfeld said. "But where would you put it?" fkummer@inquirer.com
215-854-2329
FrankKummer

Load-Date: September 22, 2019


End of Documen
t



How Climate Change Could Affect Wine; A few degrees can cut grape production.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 28, 2020 Tuesday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. A11
Length: 842 words
Byline: Frank Kummer STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
A few degrees can cut grape production.
Never heard of mourvedre? You might want to develop a taste for the rustic, full-bodied red wine because it could be crowding out such other wines as pinot noir on the shelves in coming decades due to climate change, a new study suggests.
Some of the most suitable regions of the world for wine grape growing could shrink by more than half if temperatures keep rising, and local regions wouldn't be spared, according to a study published Monday in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Although the study did not look specifically at the impact in Pennsylvania or New Jersey, both states could be affected through different aspects of climate change such as extreme weather events.
The authors of the study say growers can significantly reduce the decline by planting different grape varieties. So the more heat-loving mourvedre could replace cooler-loving pinot noir in France's Burgundy region, for example.
The international team of researchers was led by Ignacio Morales-Castilla at the University of Alcalá in Spain and Elizabeth Wolkovich at the University of British Columbia, Vancouver. The team examined 11 varieties of wine grape: cabernet sauvignon, chasselas, chardonnay, grenache, merlot, monastrell, pinot noir, riesling, sauvignon blanc, syrah and ugni blanc.
They studied the potential impact of temperature increases of 0, 2, and 4 degrees Celsius. They chose to use wine grapes as a barometer of the effects of climate change because detailed growing records stretch back hundreds of years. Wine grapes also are acutely sensitive to changes in weather.
The scientists looked at the impact that warming would have on the plants' developmental stages, such as when they bud and mature. The team estimated that regions of the world suitable for growing wine grapes could shrink by as much as 56% under an increase of 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit).
Further, 85% of those lands would no longer be able to produce good wines under an increase of 4 degrees Celsius (7.2 F).
Though losses were unavoidable in either warming scenario, the scientists say changing the growing locations of certain varieties could reduce the losses by half under the 2-degree Celsius rise, possible by 2040 under their modeling.
"In some ways, wine is like the canary in the coal mine for climate change impacts on agriculture, because these grapes are so climatesensitive," said study co-author Benjamin Cook from Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory and the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies.
The cooler regions of Germany and the U.S. Pacific Northwest would mostly escape losses under a 2-degree scenario. In addition, they could even become suitable for growing merlot and grenache.
Wine-growing regions that are hot now - such as Italy, Spain, and Australia - faced the largest losses, because they are already limited to planting the most heat-tolerant varieties.
Switching varieties, however, could be met with cultural and gastronomic resistance.
"Conversations in Europe have already begun about new legislation to make it easier for major regions to change the varieties they grow," said Wolkovich at the University of British Columbia, Vancouver. "But growers still must learn to grow these new varieties. That's a big hurdle in some regions that have grown the same varieties for hundreds and hundreds of years, and they need consumers who are willing to accept different varieties from their favorite regions."
What about locally? The wine scenes in both Pennsylvania and New Jersey have boomed with the establishment of wine trails and more farmers learning that vineyards and tasting rooms provide new income.
Lead author Morales-Castilla wrote in an email that some parts of the Eastern U.S. would lose at least some suitability for growing certain varieties of grapes.
"I think it is safe to say that under warming scenarios, climate conditions to grow those varieties are expected to change significantly," he wrote.
Dan Ward, director of Rutgers University's Agricultural Research and Extension Center in Cumberland County, said that a few degrees of warming in the region won't have the same economic impact on grape growers as in the well-established global markets of Europe and elsewhere.
Ward was not affiliated with the study and said he could not address its methods and findings.
But he noted that New Jersey with its nascent market can be more flexible than tradition-bound European growers, so temperature change would not be as disruptive.
Rather, Ward said the bigger local concern is the extreme weather events farmers are already experiencing due to climate change. Storms, wind, sodden ground, and sudden shifts in temperature can wipe out entire plantings.
"So that's more damaging than a few degrees of heat," Ward said. "A severe rainstorm can eliminate an entire year's crop. A severe change in weather can kill vines. Those kinds of extreme events are increasing in frequency, and that is a huge threat." fkummer@inquirer.com
215-854-2329
FrankKummer

Load-Date: January 29, 2020


End of Documen
t



Pa. trees may not survive climate change; Some iconic species, such as balsam fir and quaking aspen, might fall victim to worsening conditions.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
June 3, 2019 Monday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: THE REGION; Pg. B1
Length: 748 words
Byline: Frank Kummer STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
Some iconic species, such as balsam fir and quaking aspen, might fall victim to worsening conditions.
Tens of thousands of acres of mountain maple, American beech, balsam fir, paper birch, and quaking aspen that produce some of Pennsylvania's most vibrant spring, summer, and fall scenes are at risk because of climate change, according to a state agency.
"Our climate may warm too quickly for these species to adapt before dying out," the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR) wrote in a recent blog post. The post suggests a new strategy for forest management, including shifting to "change resilient" trees.
That's no small statement for an agency in charge of overseeing 2.2 million acres of state forests and 121 state parks. Not only that, the DCNR advises owners of 15 million acres of private forests.
A year ago, the DCNR issued a climate change adaptation plan in a report that detailed the issues the state's forests face with rising temperatures, more frequent storms, and overall wetter years. The plan was the result of a collaboration with 80 DCNR staff working with the Northern Institute of Applied Climate Science.
"There is certainly change we are already starting to see," said Greg Czarnecki, the climate change and research coordinator for the DCNR and an author of the report.
The report found that since the early 20th century the commonwealth has seen a temperature increase of 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit. Winter temperatures have seen the fastest rise, increasing 1.3 degrees Fahrenheit per decade from 1970 to 2000 in the Northeastern U.S., according to the report.
The temperature rise coincides with the onset of fossil fuels as the nation's primary energy source.
Moreover, the Northeast has seen an increase in the frequency of very hot days, higher annual precipitation, and heavy storms. In fact, many areas of Pennsylvania set records in 2018 for the number of days of rain and total annual rainfall. This year is on track to be another wet one.
Warming tends to promote nonnative species over native, scientists are finding.
Many trees native to Pennsylvania can't thrive in continually soggy conditions. The American mountain ash is one such species, so biologists believe it no longer makes sense to keep planting them. Rather, the commonwealth should look to plant climate-resilient trees, mostly more southern species such as sycamore, hackberry, box elder, and Eastern redbud.
But Pennsylvania's forests aren't just a collection of trees - they are complex ecosystems. Climate change will negatively affect rare species of wildlife, foster an increase in pests and invasive species, as well as fragment existing habitats, the report states. And all these factors influence what types of trees thrive.
For example, the emerald ash borer, a beetle native to Asia and first seen in the United States in 2002, has already destroyed tens of millions of ash trees in 35 states and is likely to do even more damage than initial modeling suggested. Infestations have been found in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.
It is just one of several invasive pests that attack trees.
Czarnecki notes that the eastern hemlock, Pennsylvania's state tree, has long been under attack by the woolly adelgid, a relative of the aphid. But warmer weather has allowed the insect to spread from the southern part of the state to the north and west.
"When you talk about the adelgid, it's a good example of how climate change leads to other stressors for trees," Czarnecki said.
Philadelphia's tree population is also at risk. The city is warming up, especially in the winter, and getting wetter, according to a separate report for the city issued by the Urban Forestry Climate Change Response Network. Philly is also surrounded by tidal waterways, including the Delaware River, and the report found that by 2080, sea levels in the region could rise from 1 to 4½ feet.
All those factors will affect trees, the report states.
In the area around Philadelphia, black cherry, eastern white pine, sweet birch, and white ash are all likely to decline. Northern catalpa, Japanese maple, gray birch, and American beech are all also moderately or highly threatened, that report states.
Growers ought to be thinking of picking fungal- and diseaseresistant trees, the DCNR advises.
"Wise choices for replacements could be part of the solution to ensure that our forests remain healthy, viable, and productive," the DCNR's blog post states. fkummer@philly.com
215-854-2329
FrankKummer

Load-Date: June 4, 2019


End of Documen
t



It's time for bipartisan support on climate change and infrastructure
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 13, 2020 Thursday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A17
Length: 648 words
Byline: Chris Coons and Brian Fitzpatrick
Body


As a Republican from Pennsylvania and a Democrat from Delaware, we have more in common than you might expect. Aside from a shared devotion to the Philadelphia Eagles, we both believe that Congress can and must do more to combat climate change and rebuild our crumbling infrastructure.
These two issues go hand in hand and have the potential to shape our communities and our country for decades. Climate change is already costing our economy through increased flooding, more severe storms, and devastating droughts. Delaware's and Pennsylvania's 1st Congressional Districts are about 40 miles apart, but they both border the Delaware River and are home to communities, including Levittown and Wilmington, that are at significant risk of damaging floods in the near future.
Extreme weather is also impacting the efficiency and safety of our ports, roads, and other infrastructure, which are already in need of repair. In Pennsylvania, our bridges rank as some of the worst in the country. Every one of us has blown or damaged a tire on our roads due to the growing number of potholes. Flooding and hurricanes are hitting our communities in both Pennsylvania and Delaware more often, inundating our roads, homes, and businesses. The Delaware Department of Transportation has estimated that it will cost nearly $1.5 billion to sustain the state's most vulnerable roads and bridges in the coming years.
We can and should tackle both problems. That's why we have each introduced legislation proposing a price on carbon to curb harmful emissions that are causing climate change and to invest in infrastructure here at home. HR 4520 would impose a tax on the greenhouse gas emissions of fossil fuels. S 2284 would impose a carbon fee on the use, sale, or transfer of certain fossil fuels and fluorinated gases that emit greenhouse gases.
Business leaders, economists, and a growing number of Republicans and Democrats agree that placing a price on carbon is the most efficient, market-based approach to fighting climate change while growing the economy and creating jobs. We're convinced that a carbon price will level the economic playing field in the energy sector, power market-driven innovation, and lead to the deployment of technologies that will reduce or eliminate emissions of greenhouse gases.
We've both introduced legislation to use revenues from carbon fees paid by polluters to make substantial, much-needed investments in infrastructure in our region and across the country, which is more important than ever at a time when discussion around a national infrastructure package has ground to a halt.
Building a more sustainable infrastructure will create and support jobs across a wide range of sectors - from trades professionals to construct and maintain our clean energy infrastructure, to scientists and engineers to design new technologies.
The bottom line is that we don't need to choose between clean energy and economic growth, or between combating climate change and creating jobs. We can and should do both.
Seven in 10 Americans are concerned about climate change, more than ever before, and an overwhelming majority of young Americans, regardless of their political affiliation, support policies that reduce carbon emissions. American businesses, from large oil and power companies to small manufacturers and service providers, have united to call on Congress to enact a federal carbon price.
Momentum is building on both sides of the aisle for practical, bipartisan solutions to combat climate change. As a Republican and a Democrat, we both know the time to act is now. We know that while we're at it, we can create new jobs, build a 21st-century infrastructure, and bring our two political parties together to finally get something done.
Sen. Chris Coons is a Democrat representing Delaware. Rep. Brian
Fitzpatrick is a Republican representing parts of Southeastern Pennsylvania.

Load-Date: February 13, 2020


End of Documen
t



Added risk in Black pregnancies; Study sees worse impact on health from climate change, pollution.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
June 25, 2020 Thursday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 673 words
Byline: Frank Kummer STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
Study sees worse impact on health from climate change, pollution.
Anew study suggests that pregnant Black women are at highest risk for adverse birth outcomes due to the environmental effects of climate change and pollution.
The analysis, published this week in JAMA Network Open, looked at dozens of studies related to outcomes of almost 33 million births, to see if increases in air pollutants or heat exposure related to climate change affected preterm births, low birth weight, and stillbirths across the United States.
The authors found there was "a statistically significant association" - meaning the findings are not due to chance - between increased heat, ozone, or fine particulate matter and problems related to pregnancy.
Among the groups most affected by rising temperatures were people with asthma and minority groups, especially Black women, the authors stated.
The study adds to a growing collection of medical literature focusing on addressing the disproportionate rates of maternal and infant mortality, as well as longterm health problems that Black mothers and babies face in the United States. Some studies have found that Black women face three to four times the risk of dying after giving birth, compared with white women.
The team included researchers from the Southern California Permanente Medical Group, University of Texas McGovern Medical School, California Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment, George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, and University of California Berkeley School of Public Health.
The researchers examined 1,851 studies published from January 2007 to April 2019 and focused on those that looked at possible associations between air pollution or heat and obstetrical outcomes. Of those, 68 met the researcher's study criteria.
A major pollutant, known as PM2.5, was examined in many of the studies, as was heat exposure. PM2.5 are very fine, inhalable particles of 2.5 micrometers in diameter or less, 1/30th the width of a human hair. Most form in the atmosphere from pollutants emitted by power plants, industry, and automobiles.
Urban areas tend to be ringed by more congested highways than homes in the suburbs, and have a higher density of automobiles overall. The study found that "residence in urban areas with higher exposure to air pollutants and longterm high levels of stress are known to contribute to adverse obstetrical outcomes."
"Women with asthma may be particularly susceptible to adverse outcomes, such as preterm birth and stillbirth, in association with PM2.5 exposure during gestation. Among racial/ethnic groups, our findings suggest that Black mothers are at greater risk for preterm birth and low birth weight," the authors wrote.
Separately, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is reporting a sharp decline across the nation in PM2.5, with a 47% decrease in the Northeast between 2000 to 2019. The closing of coal-fired power plants and increased auto emission efficiencies are likely reasons. The EPA has set a standard of an average of 12 micrograms per cubic meter of air for PM2.5. Recent data show that Philadelphia averages about 7.4, but that can be higher or lower, depending on the neighborhood.
The authors also looked at the effect of rising heat. In Philadelphia, some neighborhoods with more minority residents can be up to 20 degrees hotter on summer days than leafier parts of the city. This is partly because of the "heat island effect," caused by too few trees and too much blacktop and concrete.
Heat exposure can contribute to premature births because of dehydration and premature rupturing of membranes. It also can mean reduced blood flow, which can impair fetal growth. These complications can lead to stillbirths, premature labor, or damage to the placenta.
"This review suggests that increasingly common environmental exposures exacerbated by climate change are significantly associated with serious adverse pregnancy outcomes across the U.S.," the authors wrote. fkummer@inquirer.com
215-854-2329
FrankKummer

Load-Date: June 25, 2020


End of Documen
t



A winter too warm for comfort; The toasty temperatures and extreme weather are linked to the polar vortex and climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 8, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL WEEKLY; Pg. K16
Length: 927 words
Byline: BY SARAH KAPLAN
Body


ABSTRACT
The toasty temperatures and extreme weather are linked to the polar vortex and climate change
In New York's Central Park, cherry trees put out their pale pink blooms in January - months ahead of schedule. Temperatures in Sweden were so high ski resorts couldn't make artificial snow for their slopes. Snowplow operators in New Jersey had to go looking for landscaping work instead. And after one of the hottest, driest Februarys in state history, parched California is already ablaze.
Across much of the Northern Hemisphere this year, winter was a shadow of its former self - and climate change is partly to blame.
According to data released by the Copernicus Climate Change Service, Europe's average temperature for December through February was 6.1 degrees Fahrenheit above the 40-year average, shattering the previous record by more than two degrees. In the United States, temperatures were above average for every state but Alaska.
The season was the secondwarmest on record for the globe as a whole - putting 2020 on track to be one of Earth's top-10 hottest years.
This winter weirdness was in part driven by normal variations in global weather patterns, scientists say. But climate change, which tilts the planetary scales in favor of high-temperature extremes, exacerbated the variation and makes future warm winters more likely.
Karsten Haustein, a meteorologist at the University of Oxford, said climate change was the "only way to explain" these extraordinary highs. As long as humans continue to emit planet-warming gases, he added, winters as we once knew them will be fewer and farther between.
A Washington Post analysis of global temperature records has found that 10 percent of the planet has already warmed by more than 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit (2 degrees Celsius) since the end of the 19th century. The majority of these new hot spots are at far northern latitudes, where winter tends to be the fastest-warming season.
The past three months, a weather pattern known as the Arctic Oscillation caused a powerful polar vortex in the upper atmosphere, keeping cold air bottled up over the North Pole. Ripples in the vortex that cause winter's typical Arctic outbreaks never came or only briefly visited places known for their frigid cold seasons.
As a consequence, the jet stream that pushes weather systems across the hemisphere flowed fast and straight from west to east - a situation that traditionally produces mild weather.
It is not yet known whether this strong, persistent jet stream will become more commonplace as the world heats up, Haustein said. But winters that tend to be warm will become even warmer and sometimes wetter - taking a toll from ski slopes to farms, from bustling cities to windswept tundra landscapes.
This year's strong Arctic Oscillation contributed to persistently warm, high-pressure air above the eastern United States. Winter storm tracks angled from the central United States toward Canada, missing much of the Appalachians and Mid-Atlantic, and the nor'easters that normally surge up the coastline were nowhere to be found.
"A third of the U.S. just wasn't getting that deep, cold air," said Karin Gleason, a climate scientist for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Yet the same phenomena that stole winter from the East Coast contributed to extreme cold in Alaska, heavy snowfalls in the Rockies and far northern New England and record-dry conditions in California.
"This pattern we've been in . . . means the folks that are getting snow are getting lots of snow and the folks that are getting rain are getting lots of rain and the folks that aren't getting anything aren't getting anything," Gleason said.
For the National Weather Service's Eastern Region, which extends from Maine to Georgia and along the Appalachians, average temperatures in January were seven degrees Fahrenheit above the 20th-century norm. The normally frozen Great Lakes spent much of the winter free of ice. Several cities notched record-low snowfalls this winter.
Across the Atlantic, warm air and a powerful jet stream combined to brew successive deadly storms over the United Kingdom. February was the wettest month in the country's recorded history, according to the UK Met Office, and some regions received as much rain in a weekend as they normally would over 30 days.
Roiling brown rivers overtopped their banks, taking out bridges and deluging homes, even ripping off the tops of trees. At least six people were killed in the floodwaters, and roughly 2,700 properties suffered severe damage.
"It's been a hideous winter," tweeted John Curtin, executive director of flood and coastal risk management at the U.K. Environment Agency.
The balmy winter comes on the heels of a summer that was the hottest on record for the Northern Hemisphere. Fierce winds and ferocious heat fueled wildfires in Greece that killed more than 80 people. In Japan, deadly floods were followed by a killer heat wave. Germany in July notched its highest temperature ever recorded, 104.9 degrees Fahrenheit - and then broke that record the following day.
The land has "completely changed in one generation," Dönnhoff said. "Every year we have to adapt to this new warm, hot weather we are having."
In central Russia, days were so balmy they disrupted the hibernation of brown bears at the Bolsherechensky Zoo. Moscow officials had to cart in artificial snow for the city's New Year's festivities, and a suburban ski resort closed for part of December. On the resort's website, owners posted a forlorn plea: "Winter, do you remember that you are winter?"

Load-Date: March 8, 2020


End of Documen
t



Pa. voters need a 'climate moment'
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 13, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: CURRENTS; Pg. E5
Length: 704 words
Byline: Gaurab Basu
Body


Two years ago, I experienced my "climate moment." It was the moment when I could suddenly see and understand the ways climate change threatened all the things I care about. Rubbing the cobwebs out of my eyes as I woke up, I read the day's headlines on my phone. Today, it could've been news and horrifying images of wildfires ravaging the West Coast. But in 2018, one headline stuck out to me: "Strong risk of crisis as early as 2040," describing a major U.N. climate report. I walked downstairs with a pit in my stomach to find my pregnant wife and said with a cracking voice, "I think this is a lot worse than I realized."
My first reaction was guilt. How could I miss how big this is? As a physician, I've dedicated my work to caring for vulnerable communities. Mitigating climate change is critical to my patients' health. With two young children now at home, my sense of responsibility for future generations has become heavy.
There are the regular stresses of parenthood: Did they eat enough? Why are they crying? Will we ever get a full night's sleep again? But late at night after the kids fall asleep, I wrestle with a deeper, darker concern that grows out of the scientific understanding that we need a dramatic shift of course to halt climate change.
Climate change can be confusing, and it can be hard for people to understand how it impacts us and our loved ones. To unsure voters, I'd like to share some things I've learned:
I now know that during pregnancy, heat exposure and air pollution can increase the risk of preterm birth and low birth weight. Burning fossil fuels dirties our air and sends children with asthma to the hospital. Climate change increases the risk of getting infectious diseases. And protecting our environment is one of the most important things we can do to prevent the next pandemic.
Pennsylvania's children are exposed to significant climaterelated health risks. Philadelphia, for example, could have almost 100 days a year of over 90-degree temperatures in the future, more than triple the current number. By 2080, the city could feel like Memphis, Tenn., does today. Pennsylvania, which already leads the country in cases of Lyme disease, saw these cases triple 2007 to 2017. And Allegheny County gets an F on the American Lung Association report card for their ozone and particulate air pollution.
Pennsylvania has fought back with some strong policy, promising to decrease emissions by 80% by 2050. But it needs help from the federal government, which is lacking. The Trump administration has rolled back important policies like fuel efficiency standards for our cars and restrictions on pollution from coal and gas power plants. Another four years of such policies will cause profound and irreversible damage.
But the Democrats' climate policy - reflected in Joe Biden's climate plan that was informed by a wide range of advisers, including former Secretary of State John Kerry, U.S. Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, and the head of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Lonnie Stephenson - makes a $2 trillion dollar investment into a clean and healthy future. It also commits to a carbon-free energy system by 2035. This will slow Pennsylvania's overheating. It will clear the air and keep the infectious diseases at bay. It will keep children out of the hospital and save lives.
We live in a time of deep polarization characterized by fundamentally different opinions about how our country should be governed. But we also know this - there is nothing a parent won't do to make sure their child is safe and healthy. Parents perform extraordinary acts of courage every day to care for their children, even more so amid the profound challenges of COVID-19. Within our love for our children lies the infinite power to fight for their future.
As a physician, I know that passing effective climate policy is essential to protecting our children's health. As a parent, I know parents across this country can find common purpose in the sacred responsibility we share to ensure that all of our children succeed in the world.
It's time to support and pass bold climate policy and help our children inherit a safe, healthy planet.
Gaurab Basu is a primary care physician. GaurabBasuMDMPH

Load-Date: September 14, 2020


End of Documen
t



Failed by adults, students act on climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 13, 2019 Wednesday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A13
Length: 818 words
Body


You can't blame Sabirah Mahmud, a 16-year-old living in University City, for getting more than a little annoyed when adults claim that teenagers like her don't know enough to take meaningful action on climate change. And it's not just because she's learning the science of global warming as a sophomore at the Academy at Palumbo magnet school.
She's also seen the danger firsthand. Not long ago, Sabirah was visiting family in Bangladesh when the low-lying South Asian nation was hit by massive flooding.
"I had to be carried across the water," recalled Sabirah, who said that many Americans don't know much, if anything, about the extreme risk to developing nations from worsening storms and rising sea levels.
On Friday, Sabirah will talk about the problems in Bangladesh - and here at home - in LOVE Park when she joins scores of other Philadelphia-area students who've pledged to protest rather than attend school as part of America's first-ever Youth Climate Strike. Organizers are hoping that as many as 100,000 kids nationwide will strike on Friday, joining even larger throngs of students in 71 nations, including in Europe, where large turnouts for earlier actions have already jolted the environmental debate.
Sabirah and the other strike organizers - all teenagers - say the recent United Nations report warning of catastrophic climate change if the world doesn't take dramatic steps to reduce greenhouse-gas pollution by 2030 has convinced them that neither they nor the planet can wait until today's students are old enough to vote, let alone run for Congress.
She said she's heard the grown-ups argue that radical plans like the Green New Deal would wreck the e c on o m y, an d s h e counters that "if you're not planning for a future with climate change, what future are you even planning for? ... Telling a child that something is not possible is like saying your dreams will never come true."
Sabirah, as Philadelphia coordinator of the Youth Climate Strike (statewide, rallies are also planned for West Chester, State College, and Pittsburgh), said she knows that about 20 to 30 classmates at Academy at Palumbo are planning to strike Friday. She and the other teens who've been frenetically planning the Philadelphia activities since they learned of the climate strike just three weeks ago are hoping that as many as a couple hundred might attend two events, a noon rally in LOVE Park and a later afternoon event nearby at City Hall.
"We're very young, but our generation will have to face climate change," said Enya Xiang, a 16-year-old sophomore at Lower Merion's Harriton High School who's friends with Sabirah from the Penn Museum, where they both intern, and is helping organize the strike locally.
The global Climate Strike movement is also something of a full circle for teens like Sabirah who got a taste of political activism this time last year with the March for Our Lives against gun violence, sparked by the 2018 massacre at a high school in Parkland, Fla. Halfway around the world, a 16-year-old Swede named Greta Thunberg said last August she was inspired by the Parkland survivors and other U.S. gun-safety activists to launch a protest outside the Swedish Parliament accusing her country of not living up to its promises in the Paris climate accords.
Those who chafe at the idea that children can change the world are ignorant of history, including recent events. In Birmingham in 1963, the protest marches against segregation and job discrimination led by Dr. Martin Luther King were initially going nowhere, with many black adults reluctant to join in and so-called white moderate preachers telling King his timing wasn't right, prompting his Letter from a Birmingham Jail. In the end, it took a Children's Crusade of several thousand kids who didn't want a segregated future to fill the jails, prompt the white supremacists to call on dogs and fire hoses, and ultimately win the day.
Some 56 years later, we need a new Children's Crusade to convince both oil-soaked patriarchs and the cowardly moderates of the 21st century that incrementalism to save the world's livable climate is no longer morally acceptable. This late-stage Baby Boomer is ready for the solar-powered torch of leadership to pass to a new generation.
This month's action: Time to ditch the K-cup? I've promised this year to
a) write every month about climate change (3-for-3 ... whoo-hoo!) and
b) offer small, everyday tips on things you can do that make on impact, with the idea that action shouldn't always be large and overwhelming. This month's tip may be a little hard for us caffeine addicts: giving up our beloved K-cup coffee? But what if I told you 9 billion K-cups every year are filling our trash trucks and getting bulldozed under our landfills, burning up a decent amount of gasoline in the process? When it comes to coffee, maybe being a drip isn't so bad. bunchw@phillynews.com
215-854-2957 will_bunch

Load-Date: March 13, 2019


End of Documen
t



U.S. to release report on climate change; Some environmental groups claim the Trump administration hopes to obscure the findings.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 23, 2018 Friday


Copyright 2018 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: FRONT PAGE; Pg. A3
Length: 637 words
Byline: Frank Kummer STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
Some environmental groups claim the Trump administration hopes to obscure the findings.
The Trump administration will release a major report on climate change Friday afternoon, the day after Thanksgiving and one of the worst days of the year for reaching a news audience.
The Fourth National Climate Assessment, administered by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) but compiled by a number of federal agencies, is set to be released at 2 p.m. as many Americans scout Black Friday deals or travel.
Some environmental groups question the timing.
"It's an absolute disgrace to bury the truth about climate impacts in ayear that saw hundreds of Americans die during devastating climate-fueled megafires, hurricanes, floods, and algal blooms," said a statement by Mike Sac-cone of the National Wildlife Federation, who suggests the administration is trying to "obscure" the assessment's findings.
The report is expected to be an exhaustive analysis of climate change's impact in the United States, and comes on the heels of a report in October by members of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) that laid out a grim future globally due to nearly irreversible environmental changes. That report was written by 91 authors from 40 countries and loaded with 6,000 scientific references.
The new assessment is a product of the U.S. Global Change Research Program, a result of actions by President George H.W. Bush in 1989 and mandated by Congress to help the nation and world "understand, assess, predict, and respond to human-induced and natural processes of global change." It includes input from 13 federal agencies, so its scope should be sweeping.
The assessment will likely address the role of greenhouse gases, most notably carbon dioxide, which absorb infrared radiation, trap heat, and warm the planet. Methane is another, even more potent, greenhouse gas. Both occur naturally in the atmosphere, but human activity through the burning of fossil fuels has added to their concentrations.
Over time, no country has put more greenhouse gases into the atmosphere than the U.S., but the nation's output has been leveling off or decreasing with the closure of coal-fired power plants and the switch to natural gas, driven, in a big way, by Pennsylvania's Marcellus Shale output. Natural gas plants emit far less carbon.
Meanwhile, China and India have become among the largest carbon emitters worldwide. China is making a big push into renewable energy, but that will take years.
Global net human-caused emissions of carbon dioxide would need to fall by 45 percent from their 2010 levels by 2030 to reach "net zero" by 2050 and help forestall calamity if projected temperatures rise beyond 1.5 degrees Celsius.
With an abnormally cold Thanksgiving, some people might look at such snaps and conclude the warming of the earth and oceans is not a problem. But scientists note that long-term trends, not aberrations, are the real issue. Climate change is also associated with increasingly harsh weather conditions, not just warmer temperatures.
NOAA representatives could not be reached immediately about the timing of the assessment's release.
President Trump has often expressed skepticism about climate change and environmental groups have been outraged at attempted rollbacks of the Obama administration's Clean Power Plan, which sought to reduce carbon dioxide emissions, and vehicle fuel-efficiency standards.
This week, as environmental groups pointed to the devastating and record-breaking California wildfires as a byproduct of climate change, the president continued to suggest the infernos were because of poorly managed forests and bad environmental laws. But scientists say there's evidence both climate change and forest management play a role. fkummer@philly.com
215-854-2329
@frankkummer

Load-Date: November 23, 2018


End of Documen
t



Why climate change is so insidious
The Philadelphia Inquirer
October 30, 2019 Wednesday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A14
Length: 640 words
Byline: Christopher Knittel
Body


Even now that most of the world has acknowledged that climate change is real and caused by humans, combating it has proved daunting. Why? There are five features that combine to make global warming a more vexing environmental crisis than any we have faced before.
First, the pollutants that contribute to it are global pollutants, ones that do their damage no matter where on Earth they are released. Past pollutants - such as sulfur dioxide, which causes acid rain, or nitrogen oxides, which are a precursor to smog - are local pollutants, which do most of their damage near where they are released. Elected officials are much more likely to enact measures to curtail local pollutants, because the voters who elect them are directly affected by the pollution. With global pollutants, much of the damage is felt far away and, moreover, may not be something an elected official can control through local action.
The second complicating feature of climate change pollutants is that much of their damage is in the future. The electorate and their public officials have less reason to pass measures that would cost money and cause inconvenience now, when the most severe damage will accrue to some distant and unknowable future.
The third issue is that the pollutants producing climate change can't be directly linked to a smoking gun. Whereas nitrogen oxide emissions directly created smog, which was easily seen, climate change pollutants lead to more frequent bad events, but these events also can and do occur naturally. We can chart, over time, that hurricanes are getting wetter and more damaging or that drought cycles last longer, but those observations are easily dismissed by those who wish to downplay the problem, since weather has always been variable. Rising average temperatures also can be ignored, because there have always been record-setting days.
The fourth feature that makes climate change particularly daunting is that developing countries contribute a large share of the pollution that drives it. This is important for several reasons. It is difficult for developed nations to make the case that the same technologies that made their own growth possible should now be denied to the countries coming behind them. And it is hard for policymakers in developing countries to justify incurring the costs of reducing global pollutants when their citizens still struggle with getting enough to eat or having access to clean water.
The final characteristic making climate change such a thorny problem is that the pollutants causing it are tied directly to crucial aspects of people's lives, including transportation, home electricity and heating and air-conditioning. Moreover, alternatives still tend to be more costly.
Some past environmental problems offered far easier solutions. The pollution that caused the hole in the ozone layer, for example - chlorofluorocarbons - were also a global pollutant and were tied to widely used products such as refrigeration, air-conditioning and hair spray. But there were cheap, readily available alternatives. That's not the case with the petroleum products we use to power our cars and the natural gas and coal still widely used to generate electricity. Yes, alternatives are being developed, but they are often more costly and haven't been widely adopted worldwide.
If an evil genius had set out to design the perfect environmental crisis, one that would slowly destroy the Earth through humans' own actions and would be difficult to fight, those five factors would have made climate change a brilliant choice. But we didn't need an evil genius. We stumbled into it on our own.
Christopher Knittel is a professor of applied economics at the MIT Sloan
School of Management and director of MIT's Center for Energy and
Environmental Policy Research. This piece first appeared in the Los
Angeles Times.

Load-Date: October 30, 2019


End of Documen
t



Inquirer Editorial: Trump keeps changing his tune; this time on climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 23, 2016 Wednesday, WEB Edition


Copyright 2016 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: WEB; P-com Opinion; Pg. WEB
Length: 464 words
Body


President-elect Donald Trump, as he is prone to do, has again backed away somewhat from a previous position. He no longer calls studies of human-influenced climate change hoaxes. But neither does he embrace what scientists have confirmed: Sea-level increases, wild fires, floods, heat, glacial melting, insect infestations, droughts, and related food shortages are traceable to what humans put in the air that affects climate.
In a meeting Tuesday at the New York Times, Trump was asked if human activity was linked to climate change. ";I think there is some connectivity. Some, something,"; he said. ";It depends on how much."; Trump also said he had an ";open mind"; about the multinational climate accords that the Obama administration helped negotiate.
The environmentalist community reacted to Trump's apparent about-face with perplexed caution. ";Talk is cheap, and no one should believe Donald Trump means this until he acts upon it,"; said Sierra Club executive director Michael Brune. ";Trump is kidding nobody on climate as he simultaneously stacks his transition team and cabinet with climate science deniers and the dirtiest hacks the fossil fuel industry can offer.";
Throughout his campaign, Trump offered cover for polluters in the fossil fuel industry who want to unravel environmental protections to pad their bottom lines. But climate scientists are in near consensus over the negative effects of global warming; and 74 percent of Americans want to reduce pollution, according to a Pew Research Center survey.
As president, Trump can do a lot of damage to people's health, the environment, and commerce by rolling back environmental rules. Theoretically, he could even kill the Environmental Protection Agency, if the Republican-controlled Congress went along. He certainly can pull the United States out of the Paris climate agreement, which would expose American exporters to carbon tariffs from nations that abide by the treaty.
Fortunately, there are economic and political forces far beyond a President Trump's control. The market has already embraced cleaner forms of energy. Wind and solar power are becoming more cost-effective for consumers. Progress on developing batteries that can store natural energy is very encouraging. Natural gas discoveries and improved extraction technology have made it a less expensive alternative to coal-fueled power plants.
If Trump persists with promoting the destructive policies he espoused during his campaign, it will be up to the individual states to enact stronger rules to keep our air clean. Trump would better serve the nation by encouraging clean energy, which not only can save the planet from the devastating effects of climate change, it can provide many of those good-paying jobs he promised.
Inquirer Editorial Board 

Graphic

 
Photograph by: HIROKO MASUIKE / New York Times via AP

Load-Date: November 24, 2016


End of Documen
t



Report: Tiny pests eating New Jersey's pines march north as climate changes
The Philadelphia Inquirer
August 29, 2017 Tuesday, WEB Edition


Copyright 2017 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: WEB; P-com Health Environment; Pg. WEB
Length: 943 words
Byline: Frank Kummer
Body


Love the warmer winters we ve been enjoying?
So does the southern pine beetle, a rice-grain-sized pest that has munched through New Jersey s pine forests and could be a harbinger of climate change, according to a new study.
Using the Garden State as a barometer, researchers from Columbia University, the University of Vermont, and the U.S. Forest Service measured temperatures and their relationship to where the beetles were spreading.
They found that the temperature of tree bark on the coldest night of the year is critical. The destructive pests feed on the living tissue under the bark, introducing blue stain fungi. If the bark remains cold enough, the pests can t do their damage.
But the temperature on the coldest night of the year in New Jersey has been rising due to climate change, the researchers say, creating a path for the insect to start an invasion that eventually will spread into the northern United States and southern Canada.  The lows are rising much faster than average temperatures, they said.
Southern New Jersey is critical because of its 440,000 acres of pine forests. The researchers picked the southern pine beetle as a climate change focus because it seems so sensitive to temperature. And it is responsible for destroying $1.7 billion worth of timber between 1990 and 2014 in southeastern states.               USDA / AP       A close-up of a southern pine beetle, and the pests in the palm of a hand.       
 I think the presence and destructiveness of the southern pine beetle in New Jersey is well-established. It s been a problem for 15 years,  said co-author Corey Lesk, a doctoral candidate at Columbia s Center for Climate Systems Research.  The study was published Monday in the research journal Nature Climate Change.
 But it s spreading north rather quickly,  Lesk said.  Our study uses the data from southern New Jersey in relation to how it s moving north. The coldest night of the winter seems to dictate whether the southern pine beetle can live. 
The group established that bark temperature of about -10 Celsius, or about 14 degrees Fahrenheit, is the limit at which the beetle can survive.
Since 1980, they found, the coldest night of the year above 14 degrees has migrated north in New Jersey by about 40 miles a decade. And the beetles have been moving north, too, by about 53 miles a decade since 2002.
The cold-weather connection has long been known. But the new study predicts how far and fast the beetles will spread, given warming temperatures.
Using historic climate data, the team projects that the annual minimum air temperature will continue to rise a few degrees a year in the northeast.
 Given this warming trend and our criteria for southern pine beetle-suitable climates, vast areas across the northeastern United States and southern Ontario and Quebec are projected to become climatically hospitable  to the beetle before 2080, the researchers wrote.  However, the study notes that the beetle will become established along the Atlantic coastline into Maine by 2020 because of the more moderate temperatures there. It will take more time to roam further inland.               Nature Climate Change       From the study  Threats to North American forests from southern pine beetle with warming winters,   published in Nature Climate Change.       
The authors acknowledge shortcomings of the peer-reviewed study, including the complexity of biosystems and the inability to predict the success of efforts to curb the pests  advance.
In New Jersey, the beetle has definitely made its mark, according to Ron Corcory, the southern pine beetle project manager for the state s Forest Service. He said the beetle has affected about 46,000 acres statewide since the early 2000s.
However, Corcory has noticed that the damage has stabilized the last two years, with most of it closer to the coast,  sort of hugging the Route 9 corridor.  The state uses flyovers three times a week to survey the canopy of the Pinelands National Reserve and outside its borders to assess the damage, he said.
 I would say clearly we see it from Cape May up through Ocean County,  Corcory said. We re not seeing it necessarily north of that. But you re not going to eradicate it. 
The state prefers not to use insecticide as a means of control because that would kill off clerid beetles, known as checkered beetles   a big predator of southern pine beetles.  Rather, Corcory said, the state manages beetle outbreaks by cutting down nearby trees to increase the space between them, interrupting pheromone, or chemical, communication between the insects.
The study s authors note that the beetle has made its way from New Jersey to Long Island and Connecticut, estimating it will find a home in pine-dense Canadian forests by 2050.
 New Jersey really is the transitional region here,  says Lesk, a climate scientist at Columbia.  The past 10 or 15 years, it s been sort of the battleground for the northward migration of the species. So the question becomes, is New Jersey a precursor to what we ll see in the future?  
Bringing back a bird that once made a signature sound of the Pine Barrens
http://www.philly.com/philly/columnists/kevin_riordan/bringing-back-a-bird-that-once-made-a-signature-sound-of-the-pine-barrens-20170822.html
8 natural swimming spots within two hours of Philly
http://www.philly.com/philly/blogs/things_to_do/8-natural-swimming-spots-within-two-hours-of-philly-20170726.html
Insect Survey, Swann Fountain 
http://www.philly.com/philly/gallery/Insect_Survey_Swann_Fountain_.html
Take a hike! 6 Philly-area jaunts for beginners
http://www.philly.com/philly/entertainment/20160708_Take_a_hike___6_Philly-area_hikes_for_beginners.html

Graphic

 
Photograph by: Clem Murray

Load-Date: August 29, 2017


End of Documen
t



Grim report released by Trump administration says climate changing, Earth heating and humans to blame
The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 4, 2017 Saturday, WEB Edition


Copyright 2017 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: WEB; P-com Health Environment; Pg. WEB
Length: 580 words
Byline: Frank Kummer
Body


The Earth is now in its warmest period in the history of modern civilization and it is ";extremely likely"; humans are causing the rise, according to a sweeping new special report by scientists working for the U.S. government that paints a grim picture for the future of the climate.
Released Friday afternoon, the report notes that the Northeast and Atlantic coast could be in for an especially difficult time ahead — particularly with flooding and heavy storms.
";The last few years have also seen record-breaking, climate-related weather extremes, and the last three years have been the warmest years on record for the globe,"; says the report by the U.S. Global Change Research Program.
The strongly worded report, almost dire at times, comes at a time the Trump administration is denying a link between human activity and climate change. Officials did not try to stop the release of the report, which is part of the government's National Climate Assessment and is mandated by law.
The report is ";designed to be an authoritative assessment of the science of climate change"; and is a joint effort between the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NASA, and the Department of Energy.
Scientists say global average surface air temperatures have increased by about 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit (1 Celsius) in the last 115 years.    U.S. Global Change Research Program From a new report on climate change by the U.S. Global Change Research Program
";This assessment concludes, based on extensive evidence, that it is extremely likely that human activities, especially emissions of greenhouse gases, are the dominant cause of the observed warming since the mid-20th century,"; the report states. ";For the warming over the last century, there is no convincing alternative explanation supported by the extent of the observational evidence.";
Rutgers University professor Robert Kopp, a climate and sea-level rise specialist, helped write part of the report. He called it ";the most up-to-date comprehensive report on climate science available right now anywhere on the planet.";
";It confirms that climate change is real, occurring today, and principally caused by human emissions,"; Kopp said.
The report notes that ";thousands of studies"; carried out by researchers around the world have documented temperature change in both the atmosphere and oceans, melting glaciers, less snow, rising sea levels, and ocean acidification.
The seas have risen between 7 and 8 inches since 1900, the findings state. Half of that has come since 1990. Humans, through the burning of fossil fuels and other activity, ";made a substantial contribution"; to that rate, which is faster than in any other century in the last 2,800 years.
And it's having a real impact. Daily tidal flooding in 25 Atlantic and Gulf Coast cities is accelerating. Several more inches of sea rise are expected within 15 years. At a minimum, the seas will rise 1 to 4 feet by the end of the century. An 8-foot rise, which could be catastrophic, is not ruled out.
Among other findings:
";The magnitude of climate change beyond the next few decades will depend primarily on the amount of greenhouse gases (especially carbon dioxide) emitted globally,"; the report states. ";Continued growth in CO2 emissions over this century and beyond would lead to an atmospheric concentration not experienced in tens to hundreds of millions of years.";
The report concludes that the changes could become ";potentially large and irreversible."; 

Graphic

 
Photograph by: AP

Load-Date: November 4, 2017


End of Documen
t



Letters: Action needed now to curtail climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
April 3, 2016 Sunday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2016 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; P-com Opinion; Pg. C05
Length: 220 words
Body


ISSUE | CLIMATE CHANGE
 No time to wait
 It is important that we take seriously the predictions of sea-level rise cited in last week's edition of the journal Nature ("Alarm on sea level rises to new heights," Thursday). The study illustrates that climate disruption can have a greater impact in a shorter time frame than had been projected: Oceans could rise by more than 6 feet by the end of the century if high levels of greenhouse-gas emissions continue.
 Many researchers have cautioned that conditions in the Mid-Atlantic region are likely to be worse than the global average. New studies and planning tools were developed for the coast after Superstorm Sandy, but more needs to be done on the Delaware River. This includes flood mapping for different sea-level-rise and storm-surge scenarios; assessments to protect drinking water; and analysis of impacts on freshwater tidal and salt marshes, which are critical to flood protection, water quality, and fishery and estuary ecosystems. 
 The Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University and its partners are working on these critical issues, but more funding is needed. Now is the time not to sit on our hands but to intensify our efforts.
 |Carol Collier, senior adviser, watershed management and policy, Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University, Philadelphia

Load-Date: April 3, 2016


End of Documen
t



Blame climate change for hurricanes? We don't know yet
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 13, 2018 Thursday


Copyright 2018 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A13
Length: 446 words
Byline: Faye Flam
Body


It may be human nature to want to assign blame for terrible events - and since climate change became part of public consciousness, it's frequently faulted for natural disasters. Is Hurricane Florence our fault for emitting climate-changing greenhouse gases, or perhaps policymakers' fault for allowing us to do so?
The answer is the same one that applies to cancer. Environmental factors, such as excessive UV radiation, secondhand smoke, and certain chemical exposures, increase risk, but cancer has been around since the age of the dinosaurs, and there's an element of randomness to it. It may be impossible to conclude any single risk factor was the single cause of any given case.
With climate change, there is a growing body of work showing that storms will get stronger and wetter over the course of this century. Last year, in the wet wake of Hurricane Harvey, researchers told me that warming in the Arctic is making circulating winds more sluggish, and this effect may have contributed to the way Harvey stalled over Houston, where it dumped more than 50 inches of rain over a vast region.
Other researchers have shown that warming is happening in the deeper layers of the ocean, and this will give more fuel to tropical storms, allowing them to grow wetter and more powerful. Normally, cold water churned up in the path of a hurricane helps it burn out.
The National Academy of Sciences looked into the matter in 2016 with its report "Attribution of Extreme Events in the Context of Climate Change." University of Georgia meteorology professor J. Marshall Shepherd, who contributed to the report, said that it's much easier to connect climate change to extreme heat spells and the relative lack of recent cold spells.
There, the models predict these events, and there are good records from the past and a good understanding of the physics behind the phenomena. There's a good understanding of the physical mechanisms connecting more severe storms to climate change, but the models aren't yet able to say much about hurricanes specifically, and the records go back only a few decades.
Soon after the report was released, Shepherd wrote a piece for Forbes saying that "Was that caused by climate change?" is "one of the most abused questions ever." It's abused because people use it to push different agendas. But as with cancer cases, seeking a cause is a common emotional reaction. What matters is answering it honestly.
Faye Flam is a Bloomberg Opinion columnist. A former Inquirer staff writer, she has also written for the Economist, the New York Times, the Washington
Post, and other publications. She has a degree in geophysics from the California Institute of Technology.

Load-Date: September 28, 2018


End of Documen
t



Big financial disparity in climate-change work
The Philadelphia Inquirer
July 26, 2018 Thursday


Copyright 2018 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. A9
Length: 611 words
Byline: Frank Kummer STAFF WRITER
Body


Lobbyists spent more than $2 billion trying to influence Congress on climate change from 2000 to 2016, with fossil-fuel industry groups outspending environmental groups by 10-1, according to a new study by a Drexel University professor.
The peer-reviewed study by sociologist Robert J. Brulle, released last week in the journal Climatic Change, showed that "expenditures by these sectors dwarf those of environmental organizations and renewable energy corporations."
"You can sort of see the enormous mismatch of resources in the climate change fields," Brulle said Wednesday. "Environmental groups and the renewable energy [sector] are pretty much a footnote."
Brulle analyzed numbers from campaign-data website Open Secrets, run by the nonpartisan Center for Responsible Politics. He looked at spending by environmental groups and the renewable energy sector. And he looked at spending by electrical utilities, and the fossil fuel and transportation sectors.
He identified 64,162 individual lobbying reports filed by 2,780 unique organizations as related to the climate change issue lobbying between 2000 and 2016.
About $2 billion was spent influencing discussions on climate in that 16-year span, peaking in 2009 at $362 million as the Obama administration got underway. That year, Democratic congressmen introduced the Waxman-Markey Bill, a sort of cap-and-trade legislation with the goal of reducing carbon emissions. The bill squeaked by the House but never made it to a vote in the Senate.
The Republican Party took control of the House in 2010 and has held it since. Lobbying expenditures decreased, apparently as the threat of climate-change legislation also decreased.
Brulle said he undertook the study because there wasn't much literature on lobbying's influence on policy and power. He said he was surprised at the size of the spending gap.
"I knew there would be a significant disparity," Brulle said. "But when you look at the ratios, it's still 10-1. So I think the scale surprised me. It's not in the millions, it's in the billions."
He said that shows that "corporations and political players put a lot of interest in lobbying, more than political contributions."
Brulle said his goal wasn't to find villains. Rather, he said, his findings are more nuanced, showing that some fossil-fuel related groups lobbied in favor of climate-change legislation. For example, he said, the natural gas industry at times favored such legislation. Natural gas is not only a competitor to coal but is viewed as cleaner by some. Natural gas operations release much less carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas, than coal.
Indeed, the bulk of spending concerning climate change-related legislation came from the electrical utilities sector, which would include coal-fired power generation companies. That sector alone spent $554 million during the 16-year span.
Environmental and renewable energy groups sent about $127 million during the same period.
"The reality is, you've got to think in terms of color, not black and white," Brulle said. "You find variations with utilities and oil/gas companies. Exxon Mobil and Shell are different in their approaches."
Brulle said he hopes other scholars will conduct studies. He said other factors influence the success or failure of legislation, such as timing, public opinion, and political campaigns.
"We need a lot more research if we're going to understand what's going on here," Brulle said.
In his study, Brulle noted: "Lobbying is conducted away from the public eye. There is no open debate or refutation of viewpoints offered by professional lobbyists meeting in private with government officials." fkummer@philly.com
215-854-2329 @frankkummer

Load-Date: September 28, 2018


End of Documen
t



Climate change is costly, and Pa. must act to protect taxpayers
The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 20, 2019 Wednesday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A15
Length: 571 words
Byline: Eugene DePasquale
Body


In a nation divided over the essence of truth itself, it's often hard to have a conversation about how to solve actual problems like climate change. It's time to focus more attention on the rising costs of climate change and less on the excuses and distractions coming from corporate interests that profit from perpetuating the problem.
As Pennsylvania's chief fiscal watchdog, I've already identified over $1 billion in misspent funds and continue to warn taxpayers about rising costs. My recent special report on climate change documented at least $261 million in climate-related costs to Pennsylvania taxpayers in 2018 alone. Nearly half of that amount, $125.7 million, was in infrastructure damage statewide caused by recordbreaking floods and landslides.
That cost estimate is actually fairly conservative. My team could not quantify how much damage went unreported or uncompensated, such as losses suffered by homeowners who lacked flood insurance or municipalities that did not meet federal thresholds for receiving disaster aid.
The federal government cannot and will not bail us out after every major storm. In fact, the Federal Emergency Management Agency declined to cover $63 million in damage to public infrastructure across Pennsylvania last year. Remember: Even when such costs do qualify for federal reimbursement, the money still comes from our tax dollars.
Despite mounting warnings from its own experts, the federal government is paralyzed on climate change. That means it falls to state and local governments to better plan and coordinate ways to mitigate risks to people and property. According to the National Institute of Building Sciences, every $1 spent on natural disaster mitigation saves $6 in recovery costs. So, our choice boils down to this: We can pay some now, or pay even more down the road.
We can start by improving our outdated and overburdened municipal sewer systems. Not only are those systems ill-suited to handle heavier rainfalls that cause increased flooding, some also release untreated sewage into the same rivers that supply drinking water to millions of people. Tackling this serious problem would have the added benefit of creating jobs.
We must also get real about flood insurance. Only 15% of Pennsylvania property owners who should purchase flood insurance actually have it, and that share is decreasing. In addition, communities often underestimate their risk of flooding because the planning tools available to them do not yet account for more frequent and more severe precipitation.
Finally, Pennsylvania must join other states in reducing greenhouse gas emissions, especially carbon dioxide and methane, in the electricity, transportation, industrial, and agricultural sectors. As a state, we are the fourthlargest emitter of greenhouse gases but have few plans to help us improve that ranking. Aside from a decrease in emissions from the electric sector that resulted from moving toward natural gas and away from coal for power generation, no other real reductions have been made.
The facts are clear: Tax dollars will increasingly be spent to clean up after climate-related disasters and we have already wasted too much time. The costs of inaction are real and they are rising. If we can't muster the will to act for our own sake, we should be ready to explain to our children why we didn't act while there was still time.
Eugene A. DePasquale is Pennsylvania's auditor general.

Load-Date: November 20, 2019


End of Documen
t



Harvey and Irma sent a clear message about climate change | Editorial
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 16, 2017 Saturday, WEB Edition


Copyright 2017 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: WEB; P-com Editorials; Pg. WEB
Length: 553 words
Byline: Inquirer Editorial Board
Body


If the devastation to Texas and Florida by two historic hurricanes won t get President Trump s pollution-enabling head of the Environmental Protection Agency to acknowledge climate change, perhaps nothing will. But the rest of the nation can t wait for him to grasp reality.
It s time to act because hurricanes Harvey and Irma took too many lives and caused hundreds of billions of dollars in damage. It s time to act because the storms  fury swept away the foolish notion that climate change is someone else s problem. It s time because there is still time to mitigate the damage of future storms.
But there are hurdles, including EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt, who is gutting the very agency that can protect us from weather catastrophes.
Pruitt told CNN:  To have any kind of focus on the cause and effect of the storm vs. helping people, or actually facing the effect of the storm, is misplaced.  Like the world-class manipulator he is, Pruitt used rhetorical flourishes to set up a false choice.
Focusing on climate change and helping people affected by it are not mutually exclusive. He knows that, but doesn t want to upset his pals in the energy industry. If he s going to lead the EPA, he needs to pull his head out of the muck.
Millions struggled to survive the hurricanes, or watched them in horror. They know that Irma, which blasted Florida, was the strongest Atlantic Ocean hurricane ever recorded, and that Harvey dumped a record 51.9 inches of rain on Houston, crippling the city.
They know record-breaking rebuilding estimates have reached $190 billion for Texas and Louisiana, while Florida s damage from Irma is still being calculated. In comparison, Hurricane Sandy, as devastating as it was, caused $65 billion in damage.
Scientists have said for years that the effects of climate change can be mitigated by aggressively cutting the world s use of fossil fuels, which emit heat-trapping greenhouse gases into the atmosphere when they burn. That causes global warming, which contributes to higher sea levels and warmer water. Warm water more easily saturates the atmosphere, which loosens it in a rage. Climate change is like gasoline poured on Mother Nature s fire.
This country should lead the world in addressing climate change while building fortified, sustainable communities that can withstand the furious weather it causes. It would be better if the fortune taxpayers are about to spend to rebuild the Southeast was invested in better building standards and innovative projects that could serve as models of where and how development should occur.
A cautionary tale from New Jersey, which failed to upgrade building standards after Sandy hit it in 2012, should be remembered in the aftermath of Harvey and Irma. A year after Sandy, fire ripped through the freshly rebuilt boardwalk in Seaside Heights because an electrical wire at a boardwalk shop had been exposed to salt water. Higher standards might have saved taxpayers millions.
The weather records that Harvey and Irma set have prompted the World Meteorological Organization to consider retiring those storm names. A more important act would be for this country to take steps to lessen the impact of climate change   while there s still time to take steps. Congress can act, even if Pruitt won t. Texas and Florida should be leading the charge. 

Graphic

 
Photograph by: Dede Smith / Florida Times-Union

Load-Date: September 16, 2017


End of Documen
t



Teens are battling climate change. Will the adults listen this time?
The Philadelphia Inquirer
August 11, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: CURRENTS; Pg. C1
Length: 821 words
Byline: WILL BUNCH
Body


Grown-ups, do you hear something? It's our own children. They've been out there for a couple of years now, banging the drums and trying to tell us we need to do something about climate change and fixing the kinda messed-up world that we brought them into - and yet we still haven't listened.
So they're about to get a whole heck of a lot louder.
"It's very sad that the weight of the climate crisis has been put on my generation's shoulders - that we have to organize and mobilize in order to have a future," Alexandria Villaseñor told me. "We're finding more ways to take direct action and get attention from adults. It's really upsetting because we shouldn't have to do this in the first place."
Villaseñor is 14 years old. I spoke with the New Yorker and with the main Philadelphia organizer for a planned global "climate strike" on Sept. 20 and related protests - that would be Isaac Harte, a 12-year-old student at Delaware Valley Friends School - Thursday morning on a Zoom conference call that Villaseñor set up. It was not her first call of the morning. Helping to lead a global protest movement is hard work, especially when you're a rising eighth grader.
Inspired by and now closely allied with the world's best-known youth climate activist, Sweden's 16-year-old Greta Thunberg, America's growing cadre of teen protesters like Villaseñor and Harte is hoping that the worldwide strike on Sept. 20 will help this country's burgeoning movement catch up with Europe and other nations where youth actions have drawn up to hundreds of thousands.
It was just a couple of days before the gunshots in El Paso grabbed the headlines that the dome of hot air that tortured much of northern Europe in July - with temperatures in Paris rising to a once-unthinkable 108 degrees - migrated over the massive ice sheets of Greenland. In just a few days, the Arctic island outpost lost an astronomical 60 billion tons of ice underneath that baking sun. Scientists said the melt - of an extent that climate gloom-and-doomers were predicting for the latter 21st century, not now - could cover the entire state of Florida in 5 inches of water.
It's enough to make a person want to yell "Enough!" - but in the age of Donald Trump, can anybody even hear you scream? That's why a bunch of teenagers and 20-somethings - you know, the people who'll be in their 60s and 70s in 2070, when summers could be as much as 10 degrees warmer than they were in the 20th century and the seas will be at least several feet higher - have decided to grab the torch from us folks who'll be dead in 2070, before we burn it all down.
Villaseñor founded Earth Uprising and became arguably America's best-known youth activist after a trip to visit family back in her native Northern California, where the air was so thick with smoke from the Paradise wildfires that it exacerbated her asthma and she had to be sent back to New York. "I love my hometown, and I wanted to fight," she said of the experience.
Learning of Thunberg and her weekly strikes, she now plants herself in front of the United Nations with a protest sign every Friday. Organizers of the September action - centered on a U.N. climate summit where Thunberg is slated to speak after crossing the Atlantic in a non-polluting sailboat - are calling on adults to join in.
How much traction is their movement getting? In recent days, Thunberg has come under increasing attack from so-called adult columnists like an Australian-based writer for a Rupert Murdoch-owned paper who called her "deeply disturbed" and said the Swedish teen - who is on the autism spectrum - has "mental disorders." A few days later, op-ed writer Christopher Caldwell lashed out in the New York Times, calling Thunberg "a complicated adolescent" and her protest movement undemocratic.
"The fact that he [Caldwell]) had to write an article like that means that the student strikers are threatening to him - and we're threatening the beliefs of so many adults and so many climate deniers and what they've thought for so long," Villaseñor said. "We are winning the fight, but we have a lot farther to go."
This month's climate action: I've promised (successfully, for once) to write a column about climate change at least once every month and to add a small tip about something you can do in your everyday life to reduce greenhouse-gas pollution - a reminder that change needn't be overwhelming. In honor of 12-year-old Isaac Harte and West Chester borough, let's say a good word about the environmental controversy of the moment - ditching that plastic straw.
Yes, they absolutely contribute to climate change, with plastics manufacturing accounting for 6 percent of global oil consumption. Arguably worse, they're part of the growing pile of plastic gunk cluttering the world's oceans. And they can be replaced, with reusable, washable bamboo or metal straws. So what on earth are you waiting for? wbunch@inquirer.com
215-854-2957 will_bunch

Load-Date: August 11, 2019


End of Documen
t



Climate change: Reap what you sow
The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 19, 2015 Thursday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2015 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Inq Opinion & Editorial; Pg. A15
Length: 1255 words
Body


ISSUE | CLIMATE CHANGE
 Focus on today
 Amy Feldman, the Narberth homeowner who came to appreciate the effects of environmental conditions on health and became an active member of the Citizens' Climate Lobby, should reconsider her support for the CCL's dangerous plans ("A facelift for this cold house," Sunday).
 Around the world, people suffer because of climate change. Yet aid agencies are unable to properly help them because of the nearly $1 billion spent globally every day on climate finance, only 7 percent is dedicated to adaptation support. Because of the success of groups like CCL, the balance is spent trying to stop climate change that might someday happen. This is immoral, valuing the lives of people yet to be born more than those in need today.
 Policies to address man-made global warming are far more damaging than the possible future climate change that so worries groups like CCL. By so strongly promoting the idea that we can control Earth's climate as though we had a global thermostat, CCL is unwittingly encouraging one of the greatest ethical tragedies of our time.
 |Tom Harris, executive director, International Climate Science Coalition, Ottawa, Ontario, tom.harris@climatescienceinternational.net
 ISSUE | KATHLEEN G. KANE
 Deserves day in court
 A time-honored tenet of our country's criminal justice system is that an accused person is innocent until proven guilty.
 The Inquirer's Editorial Board is evidently determined to deny this legal presumption to Attorney General Kathleen G. Kane.
 Friday's editorial ("Kane doesn't have a case") insisted that Kane's political fate be determined not by a court proceeding, but by a seldom-used provision of the state's constitution that involves investigation by a Senate committee, a two-thirds vote of the full Senate, and the governor's concurrence.
 This procedure is stacked against Kane, a Democrat. The Senate is overwhelmingly Republican, and Gov. Wolf is on record that Kane should resign. Even a Democratic member of the committee has publicly called for Kane to step down.
 If this procedure succeeds, Kane may never have her day in court on the underlying charges. The headline might read: "Kane charges dropped; ouster deemed punishment enough." In that case, the search for truth in Kane's fall from grace would come to an abrupt end, which would be a tragedy all its own.
 |Patrick J. Hagan, Ardmore 
 Tried by the press
 I am horrified by
 The Inquirer (a once-respected newspaper) and its coverage of Attorney General Kathleen G. Kane. You have tried, convicted, and hanged her before she has had an opportunity to present her defense in court, despite numerous reports of inappropriate communications among judges, prosecutors, and reporters. Your editorial clearly indicates the above.
 Whatever happened to our justice system? I was under the impression that accused people are presumed innocent until proven guilty. 
 This is for the court to decide (presumably by an unbiased judge, although that does not seem to be the case here), not The Inquirer.
 |Claire Donohue, Philadelphia, cpdono@aol.com
 ISSUE | PENNSYLVANIA BUDGET
 Better late than never?
 I would like to express my heartfelt and profound gratitude to state leaders of both parties for arriving at the framework for a budget almost 41/2 months beyond the date that it should have been signed into law.
 It was extremely gracious of those whose minimum salary is about $85,000 to decide to perform their jobs and for members of the Senate to cut short another recess to return to Harrisburg to work.
 It was important for those on both sides of the aisle to make members of the public, school districts, and social-service agencies borrow money and suffer while our elected officials remained dug in on their positions, refusing to yield to reason or compromise. They had to take a stand, and it was the fault of the other guy that the budget remained stalled for so long.
 If we are lucky, we will have a budget in place by Christmas. 
 |Oren M. Spiegler, Upper Saint Clair, Pa.
 'Betrayed' by lack of a fracking tax 
 I was, in a word, appalled, that a severance tax on frackers is not part of the proposed budget, and the revenue burden instead would be passed on to Pennsylvania taxpayers. Every gas-producing state in the country has a severance tax on frackers, but not Pennsylvania. Such a tax is the most important action that must be taken, and it's not there.
 Come on, Gov. Wolf - this was a central part of your campaign, and now you're backing down without a fight. Disgraceful. The fracking industry is getting away with what amounts to a theft of state resources. Fair is fair. They can run their business and make a profit, but they must pay taxes. The governor should not fall into their game, as the Republican-controlled legislature clearly has. 
 Pennsylvanians will pay a higher sales tax, while the fracking industry will continue to be spared a severance tax. I feel betrayed and double-crossed, and I don't think I'm the only one.
 |Carl Balis, Glenolden, balcj2@comcast.net
 It's time for the people to take charge
 At what point will the citizens of Pennsylvania begin to drive "our" budget discussions? Are we really going to let the Republican-led legislature (yes, the Republicans) tax us rather than the corporations, such as the natural-gas drillers? The lack of a severance tax on frackers is particularly galling in that all other states involved in that industry levy the tax.
 All we Pennsylvanians need to do is to call our elected representatives (just as the natural-gas lobbyists are) and tell them we will not allow them to penalize us over these corporate entities. If we called every day for a week, the severance tax would be a given. Care to change Pennsylvania history? Just Google your representative and call the contact number. It's that simple. 
 |Dennis Fisher, Broomall  
 ISSUE | TERRORISM
 Genesis of radicals
 Research conducted by the Center for the Prevention of Sectarian Deviations (funded by France's Department of the Interior) and the recent publication of findings by French anthropologist Dounia Bouzar offer a clear picture of youth radicalization.
 Derived from methods comparable to those of sociologist Hans Gerth's timeless study of German National Socialists (Nazis), the key findings are important. First, men and women (boys and girls) who join the Islamic State come from middle-class and upper-class families. Second, there are gender differences; many of the women are caught up in the promise of some idyllic life that will take them away from abuse at home. Third, half of the IS recruits come from Christian families.
 If the study is replicated and the pattern persists, all of the posturing and hatred designed to create fear and loathing of Islam will result in complete failure to understand what is taking place. And if we do not get the facts, then we will never be able to find a pathway to bring a close to the brutalization and barbarization associated with the Islamic State. 
 |David R. Applebaum, professor emeritus, Rowan University, Glassboro
 ISSUE | GUN VIOLENCE
 Availability of handguns defies logic 
 Can anyone justify carrying a handgun on a bicycle ("Army war dog known as 'Major Mike' laid to rest," Friday)?
 There are many products available for bike riders to deal with dogs that do not include a gun. We're lucky it wasn't a child who was shot.
 Every European I know asks why we don't ban handguns. I can't explain it. There is no logical explanation.
 |Cheryl C. Spaulding, Downingtown, ccspaulding@verizon.net

Load-Date: November 19, 2015


End of Documen
t



What to do if flooding swamps your house; Amid concerns on losses and insurance, safety is key. Climate change will likely worsen future risk.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
July 10, 2020 Friday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: THE REGION; Pg. B3
Length: 1067 words
Byline: Grace Dickinson STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
Amid concerns on losses and insurance, safety is key. Climate change will likely worsen future risk.
Floods are the most common natural disaster in the United States. And climate change is projected to make the problem worse: Future floods are expected to be bigger and more frequent across the region.
Nearby, property owners in New Jersey and Delaware face some of the highest risks in the nation for flooding over the next few decades, according to First Street Foundation. The nonprofit, focusing on flood risk research, says that's thanks to rising temperatures in the atmosphere and oceans causing hurricanes to reach farther north.
If your house floods, no matter when it happens, you can rest assured you're not the only one dealing with this. Here's what to do about it:
Does my insurance cover it?
Here's the reality: If you have one inch of water in your home, fixing the damage can cost about $27,000, says the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Flood insurance can help. Experts recommend buying flood insurance if you own a home, no matter where you live. More than 20% of flood claims come from properties outside high-risk flood zones, FEMA reports, and most homeowners and renters insurance doesn't cover flood damage.
But remember, it's not just weather that causes flooding. Plumbing problems and clogged gutters can cause floods, too. But, the good news: Your homeowners insurance will take care of some of this. Most policies cover sudden water damage, like an unexpected broken pipe. The exception: Damage caused by lack of maintenance, like a slow leak that's been trickling for weeks, isn't typically covered.
What to do first
Depending on the source and severity of the flood, you may need to relocate immediately and deal with the damage later. In the case of a natural disaster, try your best to contact local authorities, and seek out a temporary shelter if needed.
When it's safe to return indoors, the City of Philadelphia's Flood Guide says that your first step is turning off the electricity to the area that's been flooded. If you can't access your circuit breaker without walking through water, call an electrician. Until the electricity is turned off, the water could cause electrical shocks.
If flooding is coming from a water source inside your own home, immediately locate your main water valve and turn it off.
Document the damage
Pull out your smartphone or camera before diving into cleaning. If you have insurance, photos and videos will help support your claim when you file. Document both damage to the house and its contents. (If renting, call your landlord immediately.)
American Red Cross has some additional details on what to document for an insurance claim.
Safety remains the priority here. Gear up with rubber boots and gloves before going into an area that's been flooded. Floodwaters can carry sewage and other hazardous materials.
Pump out the water
The first step in the cleaning process: Eliminating any remaining standing water by pumping, mopping, and/or opening clogged drains.
When pumping out a flooded basement, do it in stages. You also want to wait until there's no standing water left in the yard around your home. Pumping too early or too fast could cause structural damage to your home.
When you pump water out all at once, pressure from water-saturated soil on the outside of your home may cause your basement walls to collapse. The Red Cross recommends pumping about onethird of the water per day.
Disinfect the area
After cleaning up the water, it's time to start cleaning everything else. Again, wear protective gear, and open any windows or doors to improve ventilation.
Depending on the situation, floodwater may be contaminated with sewage or other dangerous bacteria. Be prepared to toss a lot, and take breaks when you need them. It's normal for this process to feel overwhelming, both physically and emotionally.
Throw away food, medicine, and drinks that may have come in contact with floodwater. This includes canned goods, plastic utensils, baby bottle nipples, and containers with food or liquid that has been sealed shut. "When in doubt, throw it out," says the Red Cross.
Also toss items that absorb water and can't be disinfected, like mattresses, cosmetics, stuffed animals, baby toys, and paper products. If you're filing an insurance claim, store everything temporarily outside your home. You want to hang on to damaged items until your claim is processed.
Dispose of all wet ceiling tiles, wet insulation, baseboards, and drywall to a level roughly four feet above the flood water line, says the City's Flood Guide. You may also need to rip up your carpet. You can try saving it by wet vacuuming and shampooing it, but if it isn't able to dry completely, it needs to go.
Then it's time to salvage what remains. Sanitize anything that was touched or may have been splashed by floodwater, including counters, cabinets, work surfaces, utensils, cookware, and toys. The City's Flood Guide recommends using soap and water first, and then wiping down surfaces with a diluted bleach solution, made from one gallon of clean water mixed with ¼ cup of bleach. Use the bleach to also wipe down wood and metal studs, twice over, before allowing them to air-dry.
Preventing mold
If a flooded area isn't taken care of properly, it will haunt you long after you're finished cleaning up. Mold can harm both your furnishings and your health.
Mildew and mold develop within 24 to 48 hours of water exposure and will continue to grow until the source of moisture is eliminated, says FEMA.
This makes it important to clean and dry the flooded area as soon as possible. It's also one reason why you have to remove porous, slow-to-dry materials, like drywall, ceiling tiles, carpeting, and upholstery.
When finished cleaning, use fans and dehumidifiers to speed up drying times.
If mold develops, deal with it immediately. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has advice for getting rid of it yourself. Depending on the severity, and whether or not you're immunocompromised, you may need to hire a professional mold remediation service. The CDC advises that you also get your heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning system checked. If the system was flooded with water or becomes infiltrated with mold, turning it on will spread mold throughout your house, and you'll need a professional to clean it. gdickinson@inquirer.com
GraceDickinson

Load-Date: July 10, 2020


End of Documen
t



How to minimize travel-related risks; As the climate changes, globe-trotters need to prepare for delays, cancellations and more
The Philadelphia Inquirer
August 11, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL WEEKLY; Pg. K16
Length: 1255 words
Byline: BY AMY ETTINGER
Body


ABSTRACT
As the climate changes, globe-trotters need to prepare for delays, cancellations and more
Hurricane Sandy hit New York City five days into our family vacation. My husband and I were stranded in an Airbnb on the Upper West Side - along with our 4-year-old daughter and my 73-year-old mother - as winds felled trees and the storm surge flooded streets and subway tunnels.
My mom, an anxious traveler, panicked while my husband and I ran around town after the storm getting food and water. Because airlines were grounded, we couldn't get back to our home in Northern California for four days. Fortunately, we were able to stay in the apartment we'd rented until we could score a return flight, but the delay put tremendous strain on my mom.
If we'd been paying closer attention to the predictions that Sandy would hit New York and New Jersey, we could have cut our trip short or canceled it altogether.
For any traveler concerned about timing, safety or cost, the days of being able to simply make reservations and hope for sunny weather are over. Climate change is increasing the frequency and intensity of certain extreme weather events, said Stephen Vavrus, a weather researcher at the University of Wisconsin. With the warming climate, we're likely to see more heavy rainfall, storms and extreme heat, all of which affect travel, said Vavrus.
You can still be a globe-trotter, but these are some tips that can help minimize risk.
Before you book
Check your credit cards for travel-related benefits that will cover weather-related events, and use the one that has the best protection to book your trip, said Sara Rathner, credit card expert at NerdWallet.
Several credit cards, including Chase Sapphire Preferred and Chase Sapphire Reserve, offer insurance for trips canceled or affected by severe weather. You can also receive reimbursement for costs associated with a trip delayed by weather, such as hotel stays. Otherwise, you'll pay out of pocket, with no chance at reimbursement. "If an airline cancels due to weather, the hotel cost is on you," Rathner said. NerdWallet has a comparison of travel cards and coverage at nerdwallet.com/travel-miles-credit-cards. You can also find comparisons at Insure-MyTrip, QuoteWright and SquareMouth.
If you don't have a credit card that offers good travel protection, consider purchasing travel insurance. "More and more people are purchasing travel insurance due to weather extremes," said Christine Buggy, vice president of marketing for Travelex Insurance Services.
Typical premiums for comprehensive coverage average about 7 percent of trip cost, Buggy said. But it's important to read the fine print before you buy. Some travel insurance plans do not cover major weather events such as hurricanes.
Keep in mind that you usually can't cancel a trip just because you see massive clouds on the horizon. "We don't insure the fear of travel," Buggy said. To be able to cancel for a full refund, the storm must have already hit your destination and done severe damage, rendering it "uninhabitable." However, an insurance plan can cover prepaid trip costs if weather interrupts your travels or causes delays, baggage loss or missed connections.
Finally, purchase insurance in advance, especially during hurricane season. Once a storm has a name and a path, you can no longer buy travel insurance for your trip.
Do your research
Planning is key, says Steve Sintra, regional director of Kayak North America, especially in the case of locales where you are not familiar with weather patterns.
"If you're looking forward to going to Southeast Asia, you may want to avoid the rainy season in May to October," Sintra said. "Hurricane season hits the Caribbean in late August through September." Fire season in the western United States runs from summer to fall, tornado season in the Midwest hits late spring to early summer, hurricanes can pummel the East Coast in the fall, and winter travel in the Great Lakes and East can be delayed by intense snow.
Familiarizing yourself with the seasonal weather, both nationally and globally, can help you avoid travel headaches. Kayak has a guide that allows you to check the precipitation and temperature patterns at top destinations: kayak.com/travelhacker.
However, if you're cashstrapped and not risk-averse, you can consider buying tickets for the offseason. "Weather can create some opportunities to save some money. Take advantage of the deals with that," Sintra said.
A week before you go
"Travelers really need to be more diligent about getting ahold of good weather forecasts and taking them more seriously," said Jennifer Francis, a senior scientist at Woods Hole Research Center.
Weather predictions have become much more accurate, but they can tell you only so much. The forecasts are particularly good at showing when a big hurricane or snowstorm will hit, but other extreme weather events, such as tornadoes, can be more challenging for forecasters and travelers to anticipate.
"You can't predict where a tornado is going to happen, but you can predict where they're likely to form," Francis said. For example, when the jet stream takes a big dip in the middle of the country in the spring, the risk for violent thunderstorms that can unleash damaging winds and hail and delay travel increases.
Temperatures are heating up globally, said Francis, and heat waves are lasting longer. Record heat spread throughout Europe in June, even as wildfires blazed in Catalonia.
These are the kinds of extremeweather scenarios we're likely to see more of in the future, Francis said. "It doesn't mean you shouldn't go, you just need to pay attention and be ready for your travel to be disrupted because extreme weather is increasing," she said.
Prepare for delays, turbulence
Research suggests that flight turbulence will increase because of climate change, Francis said. A study from 2017 predicted that climate change could lead to a 149 percent increase in severe turbulence. Sometimes these inflight bumps can be hazardous; in late May, 30 people were injured on a flight from Istanbul to New York.
These days, it's especially important to pay attention to the seat belt signs during flights to avoid injury. And if you want to minimize summer weather delays and turbulence, take a flight in the morning, Francis suggested. Thunderstorms are much more common in the afternoon.
If you get caught in a storm
Make sure you download your airline's travel app before you go, and sign up for cellphone notifications. But you don't have to wait for news. Be proactive: If you see a big storm on the forecast, contact the airline immediately to see whether your flight is canceled, and get rescheduled on the next available flight. Do not cancel a flight before your airline does; you will be responsible for whatever fees are associated with changing your ticket.
If it looks as though you'll be stranded, secure your accommodations (hopefully with a credit card that has great travel coverage). You don't want to be stuck couch surfing at an airport, especially if you have kids or elderly relatives in tow. If the hotels are booked, look on Airbnb, VRBO and other options. Or reach out on your social media channels to people you know in the area.
Once you've got a place to stay, review your itinerary and make changes to rest of the trip - such as hotel, car rental, restaurant, and tour or activity reservations - to avoid cancellation charges.
When it comes to travel, Rathner said, "you should always be prepared for things to go wrong, and hope everything goes right."

Load-Date: August 11, 2019


End of Documen
t



Extinct sparrows? Blame the rats; They are suspected, along with climate change, of a bird's lower numbers.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 23, 2019 Monday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1012 words
Byline: Sebastian Echeverri STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
They are suspected, along with climate change, of a bird's lower numbers.
For one of New Jersey's most extraordinary birds, climate change means much more than stronger storms and higher water. Researchers at the University of Delaware have found that, due to flooding, habitat destruction, and predators, the saltmarsh sparrow could vanish from the state within 20 years.
While similar in size to the house sparrows that are common throughout the country, the saltmarsh sparrow is found only along the Atlantic Coast. With striking orange markings on its head and chest, it is quite handsome. And this sparrow has adapted to an extreme environment - the saltwater marshes from which it gets its name.
"We were out here in the middle of the day in 90-degree heat and 90% humidity," said Sam Roberts, a research associate at the University of Delaware. "We were in the mud; it's saltwater, and all of our gear starts to rust because of the salt. Imagining a bird or anything being able to live out there and find strategies to survive is really incredible."
Along with Greg Shriver, a professor of wildlife ecology, Roberts has been studying saltmarsh sparrows at Forsythe National Wildlife Refuge in Stafford Township, Ocean County, for five years.
At saltwater marshes, such as those at Forsythe, ocean water flows in and out with the tides, killing plants and animals that can't handle the salt. Only a few kinds of grasses can grow here, and although there are plenty of insects, most larger animals cannot survive for long without fresh water.
Nonetheless, the saltmarsh sparrow has found a way. The birds "have evolved some adaptions for living in salty environments - they have [some of] the best kidney blood filtration system of any organism outside of marine mammals," said Nate Rice, the associate curator of ornithology at the Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University, who was not involved in the University of Delaware study.
Despite their adaptations, saltmarsh sparrow numbers are rapidly dwindling across the Eastern Seaboard.
Roberts and Shriver have monitored hundreds of sparrow nests at the Forsythe refuge, trying to understand why the species is in trouble. As it turns out, we share many of the same problems.
"Climate change is definitely affecting this species," Roberts said. "The tidal [patterns] are changing. The tide is rising."
As the planet continues to warm, sea levels are creeping higher and higher each year as polar ice melts into the ocean. And, according to researchers at Rutgers University, much of the land on the New Jersey coast is also sinking, making the total effect even worse - sea level is now approximately one foot higher than at the start of the 1900s.
This is a problem for saltmarsh sparrows, which nest in grasses on the ground.
"They time their nesting cycle with the monthly tides," said Roberts. In the time between subsequent lunar high tides, saltmarsh sparrows can just barely lay, hatch, and raise offspring to the point that the baby birds can climb to safety - as long as nothing goes wrong, such as increasingly frequent floods, brought on just by high tides.
According to a report by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, by 2050, Atlantic City could expect 30 to 105 days of flooding from high tides. Storms, too, will become more common as the climate continues to warm, creating another source of unpredictable flooding.
For baby saltmarsh sparrows, any extreme floods that occur outside of the expected monthly cycle due to lunar high tides can easily be fatal.
"You will see eggs underwater," said Roberts. The eggs can survive being submerged only for a brief time, and if the hatchlings are not old enough to climb to safety, they will drown.
What's more, rising sea levels are gradually destroying what little habitat the sparrows have left, as coastal marshes are swallowed by the ocean on one side and confined on the other by development.
And a third threat is accelerating the sparrow's decline: predators. At the Forsythe refuge, the scientists found that almost twice as many nests were eaten than succumbed to flooding.
"The [saltmarsh sparrows] that are breeding this year aren't producing enough to replace the ones who die. [And] predation is a 'double whammy': if you aren't getting [eaten], you're going to get flooded," said Shriver.
The chief suspect: species that were introduced as people built up the Jersey Shore, such as rats. "With [development], you often see a lot more predators introduced to the area. That's an important piece of the puzzle," said Roberts.
If Roberts and Shriver can identify which animals are eating the nests, they can find ways to manage these predators, and prolong the bird's survival beyond the current prediction of just 20 years. But they can do nothing about rising tides and frequent floods.
The researchers have called for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to protect the saltmarsh sparrow and its habitat under the Endangered Species Act. The agency will not make a decision until 2023, but the Trump administration already has weakened the protections granted by the act. For now, Shriver asks for people to support the sparrow by talking with state representatives "about the importance of maintaining, restoring, and creating saltmarsh habitat."
Preserving existing marshland and allowing birds to "migrate" inland with increases in sea level would ensure that the sparrow has a home, but would also benefit people living nearby. A report by the Nature Conservancy found that in Ocean County, coastal saltmarshes reduced property damage from flooding by 20%.
Roberts hopes that coastal residents will be moved to action by the plight of their winged neighbors. "We take for granted the existence, the presence, and persistence of species around us," he said. "... We hear in the news that species have gone extinct. But they are usually not in the view of our [homes]."
This story is part of Covering Climate Now, a global collaboration of more than 220 news outlets to strengthen coverage of the climate story.secheverri@inquirer.com

Load-Date: September 23, 2019


End of Documen
t



On front lines of climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 27, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: CURRENTS; Pg. C1
Length: 844 words
Body


It took the devastating floods from two hurricanes in the long, hot summer of 1985 to convince Wenceslaus "Boyo" Billiot Jr. that it was time to finally move with his wife and three children off of Louisiana's Isle de Jean Charles - a painful decision for a man who grew up venturing around the island in the shallow canoes called pirogues to fish or catch crabs and who would grow up to become deputy chief of his people, the Biloxi-Chitimacha-Choctaw Tribe.
From the drier land of nearby Houma, La., Billiot still worries about the winter days when the northern winds push the high tides over the only road to Isle de Jean Charles, cutting off his family members who've stayed behind - including his 94-year-old mom. The New York Times visited the island a couple of years ago and found kids who didn't go to school on the frequent flood days, and a family that was cooking dinner on a hot plate because their oven had become waterlogged eight years earlier.
The tiny, isolated island's problems are very much a consequence of humankind's addiction to fossil fuels - first from the wetlands that were destroyed by the canals that Big Oil cut through the Gulf of Mexico marshlands, and increasingly because of sea levels that are rising worldwide as a result of climate change. With an alarming 98 percent of the island vanished since 1955, Isle de Jean Charles made news in 2016 when the federal government - yes, a very different federal government from the one we have now - gave the island a $48 million grant to relocate everyone who lived there to safer ground. But that goal has proved easier said than done.
"She doesn't want to go - she's not moving," Billiot told me by phone last week, referring to his nonagenarian mother and her refusal to leave the only place she's ever known. Earlier this month, tribal leaders rejected Louisiana's plan to move the 30 or so families still left on Isle de Jean Charles - sometimes referred to as "America's first climate change refugees" - to a 515-acre tract some 40 miles to the north, citing a variety of objections.
And for your regular reminder that climate change is a global and not only a U.S. domestic problem, we take you to Australia, which is in the midst of its Down Under summer and where it's been so hot in recent days - 117 degrees in Sydney, for example - that confused, overheated bats are dropping dead by the hundreds, falling out of trees and littering roadways, their brains literally fried by global warming.
Consider three monumental reports that have come out just in the last 10 days or so.
>An important new study of the gigantic ice sheet that covers (or used to, anyway) Greenland found that - with the Arctic region warming up at twice the rate of the rest of the planet - melting has accelerated much faster than scientists had expected and may have crossed a "tipping point" that will lead to rapid sea-level rise in the next two decades.
>Just the week before that, a report looking at the other side of our beleaguered globe revealed that ice in Antarctica is also melting much more rapidly than climatologists expected - six times the rate of the 1980s - which will also radically change the rate of our rising seas over the 21st century.
>At the same time, and not unrelated to the two previous items, a study published this month in the journal Advances in Atmospheric Sciences reported that 2018 was the hottest year for the world's oceans since we started keeping track of that 60 years ago - beating out the previous record, which I'm sure you'll be utterly shocked to learn occurred in 2017.
TV barely covered this news, and as for the federal government - where the keys to the Environmental Protection Agency have been flung to a coal lobbyist -our national-level policy is guaranteed to go the wrong direction until at least noon on Jan. 20, 2021. Indeed, rolling back anti-climate-change policies has arguably been the most "effective" measure to come from the Trump administration: U.S. carbon dioxide emissions surged by 3.4 percent in 2018, the fastest gain in eight years.
Even with Washington hopelessly gridlocked, progress-minded states, counties, cities, and even small towns are adopting local policies that will reduce our greenhouse-gas emissions. What's more, there are changes we can all make in our everyday life - not just the big stuff like solar panels on the roof, although that would certainly help - that can contribute to the solution. Every time I write about climate change, I'll include some small tip at the end. Call it a "lagniappe" - that's Louisiana talk for "something a little extra - in honor of the hearty spirits of Isle de Jean Charles.
"It is real," their tribal leader Billiot told me, as he reminisced about the town wharf he remembered as a little boy - then two or three feet above the tides, now totally submerged. He marveled at his neighbors in Houma who still buy into the anti-science propaganda. "If you live on the coast, you know."
Let's make 2019 the year that knowing turns into action. bunchw@phillynews.com
215-854-2957 will_bunch

Load-Date: January 27, 2019


End of Documen
t



500 local protesters join rally in D.C. against climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 18, 2013 Monday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2013 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: PHILADELPHIA; P-com News Local; Pg. B01
Length: 736 words
Byline: By Sandy Bauers

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


More than 500 people from the region joined thousands of protesters Sunday in Washington, calling for strong action on climate change and a stop to the Keystone XL pipeline. 
 The pipeline would transport oil from Canada to the Gulf Coast. Opponents say it would worsen climate change by encouraging further development of the tar-sands oil resource.
 They spent several hours in the bitter cold and a strong wind cheering, waving signs, listening to speakers, and marching around the White House, although President Obama was in Florida for a golf game.
 Many - from experienced hands who have been at this for years, to middle-school students excited to be at their first big rally - consider climate change the defining issue of their time. 
 "Twenty-five years from now, nobody is going to look back at our era and say, 'Boy, I wonder how that fiscal cliff thing came out,' " said Bill McKibben, founder of 350.org, an environmental group fighting climate change and one of the sponsors of the rally.
 "Everyone is going to look back and say, 'Well, the Arctic melted, and then what did you do?' "
 The rally came after a week of climate-change developments.
 In his State of the Union address Tuesday, Obama said: "For the sake of our children and our future, we must do more to combat climate change." He added, "If Congress won't act soon to protect future generations, I will."
 On Wednesday, as a precursor to Sunday's rally, nearly 50 activists, including Philadelphian Eileen Flanagan, were arrested in an act of civil disobedience outside the White House.
 The next day, the Government Accountability Office added the financial liability of climate change to its list of "high-risk" areas for the U.S. government, and two senators introduced climate-change legislation that would impose a fee on carbon emissions.
 The Sierra Club, Clean Air Council, Earth Quaker Action Team, Citizens for Pennsylvania's Future, and other groups organized bus transportation from this region. 
 After adding yet another bus Saturday - Sierra Club organizer William Kramer said he was getting phone calls and e-mails up to the end - 11 buses with more than 500 people on board headed out from King of Prussia, Quakertown, Devon, West Chester, and Philadelphia. Several more left from central New Jersey.
 For Jean Mollack, 58, a laid-off worker from Doylestown, it was one more in a series of Washington rallies that began with a Vietnam War protest in 1971. "I think we're ruining the world with our dependence on fossil fuels," she said. 
 If Mollack was an old hand, Grace DiGiovanni, 12, who goes to Green Street Friends School in Philadelphia, was one of the newbies. She said that attending the rally was all about her future. "This is for my generation of kids."
 Groups from schools and houses of worship joined the buses. Organizers estimated the crowd at 35,000.
 Joy Bergey, 57, a policy director for the environmental group Citizens United for Pennsylvania's Future, brought eight youths from Chestnut Hill United Church, where she's a longtime member.
 They included Sarah Noonan-Ngwane, 16, who said environmental issues "should be at the core of what happens over the next four years." 
 And Monica Guess, 17, who said that if the Keystone pipeline got built, "it changes our whole future."
 For Bergey herself, the rally was the continuation of a battle she began in 1979, when she had her first argument with someone who said climate change wasn't happening. 
 "I will not stop fighting," she said. "I want there to be a livable planet for all God's creatures."
 Nancy Grossman, 53, a pharmacist who lives in Jackson, N.J., was worried about climate change even before she saw the destruction that Hurricane Sandy left along the coast. 
 "It's one disaster after another," she said. "I don't know what other proof people are looking for."
 Albert Accoe, 62, a security consultant from West Philadelphia, said he was attending "for my children and grandchildren."
 Liz Robinson, 63, who heads the Energy Coordinating Agency in Philadelphia and attended with her entire family, said, "Everybody should be here. . . . It's very profitable to burn oil. Unless all of us stand against climate change, it'll be too late."
 Contact Sandy Bauers 
 at 215-854-5147 or sbauers@phillynews.com, or follow on Twitter @sbauers. Read her blog, 
 "GreenSpace," at www.philly.com/greenspace.
 This article contains information from 
 Bloomberg News.     

Load-Date: February 18, 2013


End of Documen
t



The environmental burden of Generation Z; they believe it's their job to save the planet - and it's ruining their mental health. Who's to blame?
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 16, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL WEEKLY; Pg. K13
Length: 4040 words
Byline: BY JASON PLAUTZ
Body


ABSTRACT
they believe it's their job to save the planet - and it's ruining their mental health. Who's to blame?
The teenagers pour off buses near Denver's
Union Station under a baking September sun. Giggling with excitement at skipping out on Friday classes, they join a host of others assembled near the terminal. Native
American drummers and dancers rouse the crowd, and there's a festive feeling in the air. But this is no festival. The message these young people have come to send to their city, to their state, to the nation - to the world of adults - is serious. Deadly serious. "We won't die from old age," reads one of the signs they hoist above their heads. "We'll die from climate change."
High school sophomore Sophie Kaplan is marching in a bright yellow flowered sundress, but the sentiment on her poster is hardly so sunny: "Why Should I Study For a Future I Won't Have?" She thinks about climate change every day, she tells me. She reads "about how we're on the brink" and hears her teachers and parents tell her that it's up to her generation to fix things. "I don't understand why I should be in school if the world is burning," she says. "What's the point of working on my education if we don't deal with this first?"
As the estimated 7,500 marchers converge on the state capitol, I come upon Chris Bray and his children, sixth-grader Arianna and second-grader Colin. Dressed in plaid shorts and blue sunglasses, Colin hovers shyly behind a homemade sign (a picture of coal with the word "Why?" and a shining sun with the words "Why not?"). The boy is "scared about the planet," he tells me, but it feels good to be surrounded by so many other people who care, since he can sometimes feel as if nobody else is worried.
Climate change, say Chris and his wife, Amber, is a big topic of discussion in their home. Colin and Arianna have always shown an interest in the environment. They've cried over nature documentaries about the destruction of the coral reefs and sought out coverage of 17-year-old Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg.
Chris and Amber are proud that their children are so aware, and of the way their kids' interest has informed their own actions. But at the same time, like many parents, they're concerned that their children could be overwhelmed by predictions about the environment that seem to be growing ever more dire.
The United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change said in 2018 that policymakers have just 12 years to avert the worst consequences of global warming; news coverage is constantly filled with apocalyptic stories of storms and wildfires. Young people, absorbing the gravity of these warnings, have become the defining face of the climate movement - marching, protesting and berating their elders for bequeathing them an uncertain, unstable future. Underlying their anger, though, is another feeling: anxiety. And it's something they're increasingly voicing.
Teachers hear their students talk about panic attacks when wildfires break out, and psychologists face young patients weeping about their fear of never having a family. Amber Bray recalls Colin solemnly telling her on his eighth birthday, "My life would be better without climate change."
How to handle such fears? The adult world seems unsure, at best. The Brays, for their part, think it's important to work through the anguish and keep talking to their kids. "We've decided to be open and honest. They have feelings, we validate them," Chris says. At the same time, he admits, "It's sad, it's hard."
As climate change continues unabated, parents, teachers and medical professionals across the country find themselves face-to-face with a quandary: How do you raise a generation to look toward the future with hope when all around them swirls a message of apparent hopelessness? How do you prepare today's children for a world defined by environmental trauma without inflicting more trauma yourself? And where do you find the line between responsible education and undue alarmism?
The nexus between climate change and the mental health of children is rarely at the forefront of the discussion around environmental politics, but it's very real: In a Washington Post-Kaiser Family Foundation poll of American teenagers released in September, 57 percent said that climate change made them feel scared and 52 percent said it made them feel angry, both higher rates than among adults. Just 29 percent of teens said they were optimistic. Reports such as the U.S. government's National Climate Assessment have cited mental health concerns as a side effect of climate change. The American Academy of Pediatrics issued a policy statement in 2015 warning that climate change poses threats to "children's mental and physical health," and that "failure to take prompt, substantive action would be an act of injustice to all children."
In expert testimony for the plaintiffs from 2018 in Juliana v. United States - a lawsuit filed by a number of young people seeking to force the U.S. government to adopt policies to fight climate change and end fossil fuel subsidies - psychiatrist Lise van Susteren wrote that children will be "at the center of the storm" as climate change worsens and that they may already be feeling mental health impacts. "Day in and day out worrying about the unprecedented scale of the risk posed by climate change . . . takes a heavy toll on an individual's well-being, wearing them down, sending some to the 'breaking point,' " she wrote. "Children are especially vulnerable." Those words, she told me, were "really painful" to write. Interviewing children about their fears for nature and their worries about their future families, she says, left her with "a sense of shame."
"Eco-anxiety" or "climate depression" is playing out in real terms among young people, sometimes in extreme ways: A 2008 study in an Australian medical journal chronicled the case of a 17-year-old boy who was hospitalized after refusing to drink water during a nationwide drought, in what the authors called the first case of "climate change delusion." A psychiatrist I interviewed told me a patient had confessed that she secretly wished a pandemic would strike to ease stress on the planet.
But the anxiety can manifest in subtler ways as well. Sarah Niles, an 18-year-old from Alabama, told me that her fears about climate change have simply become a part of her life. "I feel like in my peer group, you just go right from talking about polar bears dying to 'Did you see what Maya posted on Snapchat?' Nobody has a filter to adjust," Niles says. "It's like, the ice caps are melting and my hypothetical children will never see them, but also I have a calculus test tomorrow."
According to the National Institutes of Health, nearly 1 in 3 people ages 13 to 18 experience an anxiety disorder, and a study published in April 2018 in the Journal of Development and Behavioral Pediatrics found that anxiety diagnoses in children ages 6 to 17 increased 20 percent between 2007 and 2012. There's no single cause: A nonstop barrage of social media, a heightened political climate and the threat of school shootings are all stressors. And that's on top of being a teenager, with all the tumult that entails.
But the often apocalyptic nature of the news about climate change is perhaps uniquely paralyzing. Elizabeth Haase, a psychiatrist in Nevada, describes how some of her patients can be overwhelmed by the scale of the problem: "I'm supposed to be emotionally hopeful in a hopeless situation, and I'm supposed to act powerful when the source of power is collective power and it's overwhelming, and I'm supposed to feel faith and do things to be sustainable when nature is declining around me." Overcome by a sense of powerlessness, they simply feel stuck in a situation, with no way out.
Park Guthrie knows about this paralysis in climate-change-spooked kids. A sixth-grade teacher in Sonoma County, Calif., he has seen the toll that the state's raging wildfires can take on the generally enthusiastic 11- and 12-year-olds in his classes. He has witnessed panic attacks triggered by the mere smell of smoke. When smoke from a nearby controlled burn once drifted to the school, he recalls, one boy smiled blankly and announced, "I think I'm having PTSD." Last year, after the Kincade Fire burned nearly 78,000 acres in the county in late October, Guthrie found himself, not for the first time, comforting students worried about their homes and their relatives.
Guthrie understands how much climate change troubles his students, but he doesn't shy from talking about it. He confronts not only their fears, but also the political reality of denial and decades of inaction, all of which is disturbing to his students. "It's like there's a paradigm shift, like when you learn that Santa Claus isn't real," he says. "Everything we teach them, that science is a tool for understanding the world, that adults are protecting you, falls apart. There's nothing to prepare them for this enormous problem that we simply haven't solved."
Guthrie fears that by not speaking up forcefully about climate change as a generational issue, institutions are "propping up this fictional story that you can care for kids in our country while neglecting or ignoring the climate." As a teacher, Guthrie is a "mandated reporter," someone legally required to speak up about signs of child abuse and neglect. If climate change will harm his students and is causing them anguish, isn't silence on the issue a violation of that duty?
Guthrie has taken his views national as the co-founder of the nonprofit Schools for Climate Action (S4CA), which asks schools and other educational groups to pass resolutions highlighting the effects of climate change on children. Since December 2017, more than 100 resolutions have been passed, 66 by school boards and 29 by student councils. Many set sustainability goals or call on Congress to take climate action. Most are shepherded by students, who write the resolutions with the help of administrators and school board members.
Though they don't commit organizations to any specific action, the resolutions send a signal that there are support networks for students struggling with climate change. They also bolster the idea that students can at least make a difference by raising awareness: Jordyn Bauer, a 20-year-old sophomore at California's Sonoma State University who worked to pass a resolution in her California school district in 2018, said it helped validate her ability to do something. "Too many people are just standing by," she says. "I felt like it was my responsibility to take charge."
Not everyone, however, is on board with Guthrie's agenda. Last spring, Guthrie and a number of S4CA partners - including several students - lobbied the National Association of School Psychologists to adopt a resolution stating that climate change is a children's issue, as the group's California chapter had done. But the organization declined. The group's executive director, Kathleen Minke, responded in an email to Guthrie that her group focuses on "issues that have a very direct impact on schools, student learning and children's mental and behavioral health." Climate change, she said, "falls outside this professional focus." When I interviewed her later, Minke told me that her organization isn't ignoring climate change and has dedicated resources to help school psychologists deal with kids affected by natural disasters. But when it comes to managing anxiety, their focus is on coping, not causes. "You're not going to develop an entire curriculum around anxiety related to 'x,' " she says. "There are too many x's for that to be efficient."
Likewise, S4CA's efforts to get national school board groups to lobby on climate change have come up short. Chris Ungar has been a school board member for 20 years in California's San Luis Coastal Unified School District. Last spring, he proposed language to the National School Boards Association recognizing climate change as a threat and asking Congress for funding to help schools affected by natural disasters. It easily passed a policy committee, but before the full association, the resolution was, in Ungar's words, "gutted" - the climate change language stripped because delegates from some states worried that it could obscure the natural-disaster funding request.
That outcome underscored one of the biggest barriers to Guthrie's work: Education and youth groups don't always see climate change as having a direct link to children if they're not being displaced by a disaster - and sometimes not even then. Still, more schools have picked up the S4CA resolution model, and in September, Rep. Barbara Lee (D-Calif.) introduced a nonbinding resolution acknowledging climate change as a social justice issue and supporting more climate education. "By failing to address climate change in a meaningful way, we are failing our children," she said in a floor speech, "and they know it."
Although there's little question that climate change will harm younger generations, there's considerably more debate about a related concern - that the rhetoric surrounding the issue is equally injurious. When young people seize on the U.N. warning that governments need to take action in 12 years to conclude, incorrectly, that the planet has only a decade remaining (Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez said last year that millennials fear "the world is gonna end in 12 years if we don't address climate change"), or when the website of the U.K.-based activist group Extinction Rebellion warns that "societal collapse and mass death are seen as inevitable by scientists and other credible voices," it can be terrifying. Some voices are now sounding the alarm about alarmism, suggesting that we'd all be better off if we dialed down some of the hyperbole.
"This message of 'We're all going to die, how dare you say there might be something we can do' . . . that's just not supported by the science," says Kate Marvel, a climate scientist and mathematician at Columbia University. "I'm not saying we can all rest, and I'm not saying we live in the best of all possible worlds. But one can have a sense of optimism by working towards a solution."
Many adults I talked to said the heightened rhetoric around climate change reminded them of the panic around nuclear weapons during the Cold War, when school lessons were interrupted by "duck and cover" drills and there was perpetual fear that the world might end at any moment. The 1983 TV movie "The Day After," which dramatized the fallout from a nuclear attack on the Midwest, emerged as an apocalyptic touchstone; surveys after the film aired found viewers were more depressed about their chances of survival and were less optimistic about their ability to influence nuclear weapons policy.
Michael Shellenberger, an author and founder of the California-based nonprofit Environmental Progress, which promotes nuclear energy, remembers how panicked he felt after watching the movie. Now, he considers it "bizarre" that adults would have decided "to traumatize teenagers with that." Today, he says, some in the environmental movement are making climate change "the new apocalypse."
"We have people that know the power of fear manipulate consciously the psychology of young people in a way that is wrong and should stop," he argues. "What people need to understand is that there are extreme scenarios . . . and they are not the same thing as predictive science." Indeed, scientists say that while some warming is baked in, action now could avert the worst consequences. Marvel puts it this way: "There are so many futures between doomed and fine."
Even the lower end of that range of futures, however, can mean destructive storms, displacement and economic upheaval, and that's the reality that teachers have to communicate. To Meghan Duffy, a professor of ecology and evolutionary biology at the University of Michigan, the climate change lecture in her introductory biology course is the "most important" class she teaches. But, worried that the class might be overwhelming or not communicated well, she surveyed her students for a study published in 2019. After the climate change lesson, students knew more but felt worse: Only 4 percent of the class thought humans would successfully address climate change. One student wrote in an anonymous survey, "I understand that global warming is an important part of learning from this class, but at some point one of the lectures gave me an anxiety attack, so that wasn't fun."
Studying that emotional response forced Duffy to reevaluate her syllabus. This past fall, she added a second lesson about solutions, highlighting the drop in the cost of renewable energy and improvements in battery technology for storing clean energy. It's a strategy Duffy says is necessary for any climate communicator, but especially one working with young minds. "There's a danger in having the instruction emphasize climate catastrophe," she says. "It's tempting to say how bad things are, how much we need to stop it. But at some point you've accidentally said this is a foregone conclusion. We can overemphasize how scary it is to the point where people feel hopeless and panicked."
Working toward a solution, in fact, is the consensus approach to calming young people's fears about the future. The key to addressing eco-anxiety at any age, says psychiatrist Haase, is getting "unstuck," losing that feeling of paralysis in the face of the problem's magnitude. Haase is a founding member of the Climate Psychiatry Alliance, an ad hoc group that has sprung up to offer patients and doctors advice on discussing climate anxiety. It's one of a number of such groups that are tackling the growing rate of patients panicked about the state of the world: The Good Grief Network was launched in 2016 to offer group counseling sessions to the climate-anxious.
The emphasis, doctors say, should be on personal responsibility and empowerment. For an overwhelming problem like climate change, being able to take some action - whether eating less meat or switching to an electric vehicle - can help fight paralysis and get patients to recognize that the worst of climate change is not a fait accompli and that some progress can be made.
As the ones usually tasked with bringing climate change information to their students, teachers are increasingly taking on the weight of the psychological implications. Lisa Balazs, a science teacher at a private school outside Birmingham, Ala., told me she persuaded her school to offer a specialized climate change class last year. She wanted to walk students through the physics and chemistry of the changing climate, but also focus on solutions. "I wanted them to feel like they were empowered in the way you could have an intelligent conversation," she says. "The scary part is feeling like there's nothing you individually can do, especially when you look at the government. So turning it around and putting it back in your personal control, this is what you can vote for and work for."
Balazs highlighted how politicians even in her conservative state have promoted clean energy, and she encouraged her students to take political action. Sarah Niles, who took Balazs's class as a senior, says it was "inspiring" to learn about solutions to climate change, especially since, so often, the subject "felt like devastation with no hope." She recalls "days after class where we would go to the common room and just sit because we didn't know what to do." Now, she's taking a gap year before college and volunteering in Rockport, Tex., to help rebuild the community, which was devastated by Hurricane Harvey in 2017.
Of course, before you can bring up solutions, you have to be able to bring up climate change at all. Schools, however, have sometimes been slow to bring climate change into the classroom, especially in conservative areas. Lawmakers in states such as Florida and Texas have pushed bills that would strip climate change from curriculums entirely. In Pennsylvania's Central Bucks School District in 2017, a Republican school board member used fears about rising anxiety among the young in lobbying to remove textbooks that discussed climate change.
Moreover, many teachers are unequipped to deal with it. A survey from the National Center for Science Education and Penn State's Survey Research Center during the 2014-15 school year found that fewer than half of the teachers responding had taken a formal course on climate change. The same survey found that only two-thirds of teachers said they emphasize that human activity is the primary driver of climate change, despite the scientific consensus that humans are the cause.
Many teachers told me they're supported by the Next Generation Science Standards, written in 2013 to overhaul science teaching. Created by officials from 26 states and several national science education organizations, the standards take climate change as a given, expecting students to be taught that human activities contribute to global warming and that the phenomenon is having a dire effect on human life. They also go deep on solutions, such as clean energy. So far, though, only 20 states and the District of Columbia have adopted the standards, although 24 other states have drawn up their own guidance based on them.
Renee Belisle, a curriculum specialist for Denver Public Schools, says that the standards, which passed narrowly in Colorado, have played a "hugely significant" role in a rewrite of the district's high school science curriculum, which now integrates climate change into biology, physics and chemistry classes. Each climate change unit contains an action item; as early as middle school, students are taught that steps such as changing your diet or turning off the lights can have an effect. "That arc of ending with the empowerment is a way to help mitigate that pessimism that could develop," Belisle says, "particularly with kids, who might feel disenfranchised."
And yet the seemingly best approach - making young people feel enfranchised to deal with climate change - comes with both upsides and potential downsides. On the one hand, what better way for young people to process climate change worries than to pressure adults to actually do something about the crisis? Campaigns like the youth-led Sunrise Movement, founded in 2017, have pursued this strategy, placing young people on the front lines of the fight over the Green New Deal; the group gained Internet notoriety in February 2019 with a video of students, some as young as 11, confronting Sen. Dianne Feinstein of California over her lack of support for the plan.
On the other hand, high schoolers are still high schoolers, with homework and soccer practice and dates and part-time jobs. And teenagers I spoke with admitted that activism can be a burden. "I'd love to not be doing this. I'd much rather be hanging out with my friends, watching something stupid on Netflix," says Jonah Gottlieb, 17, a high school senior in California. "I have to because adults have left us no choice."
That feeling of responsibility, of being let down by prior generations, permeated the conversations I had - and there probably isn't a good solution, aside from actually solving climate change itself. For now, parents are left to walk a tightrope between being honest and being comforting, between empowering their kids and weighing them down with the responsibility of saving the world.
The Bray family, at least, is erring on the side of not underplaying the situation - or the need for everyone to contribute to solutions. Amber Bray recalls the day the U.N. panel issued its 12-year warning. When Arianna came home from school, Amber told me, she hugged her daughter tight and, with tears in her eyes, apologized. Both said that day changed their perspective and rallied the family to work harder to reduce its environmental impact. "Some parents might think they should shield their children from the realities," Amber says. "I believe it's my job as a parent to prepare my children to be ready, make good choices, be part of the solution. It's a disservice to our children if we don't teach them about life's dangers and how to protect themselves, even as we pray it is never necessary."

Load-Date: February 16, 2020


End of Documen
t



Penn doctor's comments stir backlash; Longtime associate dean said gun control, climate change don't belong in medical-school curriculum.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 14, 2019 Saturday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: THE REGION; Pg. B2
Length: 666 words
Byline: Tom Avril STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
Longtime associate dean said gun control, climate change don't belong in medical-school curriculum.
Politics and social justice should not be part of medical school according to the former associate dean of curriculum at the University of Pennsylvania's Perelman School of Medicine.
Stanley Goldfarb, a kidney specialist and longtime faculty member at Penn, made his case in a Wall Street Journal column, saying that med schools should not spend time on gun violence, climate change, and "other progressive causes only tangentially related to treating illness."
Many of Goldfarb's fellow physicians, including some of his Penn colleagues, took exception to his piece, which was posted online Thursday and appeared in Friday's print edition.
Kit Delgado, an emergency medicine specialist at Penn, said traditional med-school curriculums do not fully prepare students to treat illness and trauma if they do not also address underlying social causes.
"Excellent clinical care for survivors goes to waste if the root causes that led to the injury in the first place are not addressed and the patient is shot again," Delgado wrote on Twitter.
Megan Ranney, an emergency medicine specialist and associate professor at Brown University's Alpert School of Medicine, was more blunt.
"This is absolutely drivel," she tweeted. "About as BS as anything I've heard. The public's health IS OUR JOB. And throughout history we, as doctors, have helped lead change in behalf of our patients' health. Whether smallpox vaccines, sanitation, or seatbelts, #ThisIsOurLane."
Her hashtag was a reference to the aftermath of recent mass shootings, when physicians who advocate for gun-safety measures have been told by gun-rights activists to "stay in your lane."
Goldfarb did not dispute that some of what he called social justice issues were worthwhile, but he warned that any time spent teaching them in medical school meant less time for clinical care.
"These educators focus on eliminating health disparities and ensuring that the next generation of physicians is wellequipped to deal with cultural diversity, which are worthwhile goals," Goldfarb wrote. "But teaching these issues is coming at the expense of rigorous training in medical science."
Goldfarb graduated from the University of Rochester medical school in 1969, according to his Penn Medicine profile page. In an email, he said he had received some positive responses from students and faculty.
The Penn communications office did not respond to a request for an interview with Goldfarb, but shared a letter from Dean J. Larry Jameson and Senior Vice Dean Suzanne Rose that was sent to students and faculty.
It read, in part:
"Please know that the views expressed by Dr. Goldfarb in this column reflect his personal opinions and do not reflect the values of the Perelman School of Medicine. We deeply value inclusion and diversity as fundamental to effective health care delivery, creativity, discovery, and lifelong learning. We are committed to ensuring a rigorous and comprehensive medical education that includes examination of the many social and cultural issues that influence health, from violence within communities to changes in the environment around us."
In his column, Goldfarb said that while he was associate dean of curriculum at Penn, he was "chastised by a faculty member for not including a program on climate change in the course of study."
Some medical schools already have added lessons on climate change. In addition to covering the direct effects of warmer temperatures on the old and frail, faculty are addressing secondary impacts such as how a warming planet is expected to fuel the spread of insect-borne diseases.
A few physicians on social media were supportive of Goldfarb.
Karan Chhabra, a University of Michigan faculty member, tweeted that medical school curriculums already are packed, and that certain issues might be better handled in college.
"Med students still have 4 years of undergrad to become liberally educated," he wrote.

Load-Date: September 14, 2019


End of Documen
t



'Merchants of Doubt': How climate-change denial is sold
The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 27, 2015 Friday, WEB Edition


Copyright 2015 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: FEATURES WEEKEND; P-com Ent. Entertainment; Pg. 00
Length: 542 words
Byline: By Steven Rea

Inquirer Movie Critic
Body


Anyone who cares about their children's future, indeed the planet's future, should see Merchants of Doubt. The problem is, the people who really need to see it - climate-change deniers, politicians with ties to the fossil-fuel industries, the blithely indifferent - aren't likely to. 
Robert Kenner's expert adaptation of science historians Naomi Oreskes and Erik M. Conway's book is advocacy filmmaking, a smartly packaged cautionary tale. But thanks to campaigns by lobbyists and industry organizations - the individuals and groups who give the film its title and who have been busy sowing seeds of discord in the media - disbelievers are out there, and ardent. 
Merchants of Doubt begins at the fabled Magic Castle in Hollywood, where magician Jamy Ian Swiss dazzles his audience with card tricks - sleight-of-hand, misdirection, deceit. 
What's that got to do with anything? 
Everything. 
Merchants of Doubt examines how the tobacco industry pulled off a similar con, arguing that cigarettes did not cause cancer and that nicotine was not addictive, even as their own scientists knew otherwise. Epic public-relations campaigns were launched to distract and dissuade, to find physicians and "experts" to counter the increasingly alarming studies. 
It took decades before cigarette manufacturers were forced to acknowledge the truth. 
That same strategy, according to Merchants of Doubt, is now being deployed by oil companies, coal companies, and free-marketeers who argue that climate change isn't the result of human action - that it is naturally occurring, or maybe not occurring at all. Never mind the overwhelming consensus reached by scientists. 
Never mind the rising ocean levels, extreme weather patterns, hurricanes, droughts. 
Marc Morano, an unapologetic ringleader in the movement to thwart climate-change action, pops up on news shows to challenge earnest, nerdy scientists, while an institute funded by the Koch brothers publishes "research studies" aimed at obfuscation and obstruction. Pseudo-science is just as good as real science, especially when it's delivered in tandem with get-the-government-off-our-backs slogans, rallying the troops, and railing against "liberals" such as Al Gore. 
When global-warming skeptics such as former South Carolina congressman Bob Inglis, who represented one of the reddest Red State districts in the land, change their minds, look out. Inglis started talking about the climate-change crisis, then lost his long-held seat to tea party-backed Trey Gowdy in the 2010 primary. Similarly, Michael Shermer, editor of Skeptic magazine and an avowed libertarian, read the reports and the research and came to the conclusion that climate change was for real. But when he tried to say as much to fellow libertarians, he was shouted down, often hatefully. 
Merchants of Doubt shouldn't be a hard sell. The fact that it is should make you very mad. 
  Merchants of Doubt ***1/2 (Out of four stars)
Directed by Robert Kenner. With Frederick Singer, Naomi Oreskes, Jamy Ian Swiss, James Hansen, Marc Morano, Bob Ingliss. Distributed by Sony Pictures Classics. 
Running time: 1 hour, 33 mins. 
Parent's guide: PG-13 (adult themes). 
Playing at: Ritz Bourse. 
srea@phillynews.com
 215-854-5629 
 @Steven_Rea 
www.philly.com/onmovies

Graphic

 
Sony Pictures Classics

Load-Date: March 27, 2015


End of Documen
t



'Merchants of Doubt': How climate-change denial is sold
The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 27, 2015 Friday, WEB Edition


Copyright 2015 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: FEATURES WEEKEND; P-com Ent. Entertainment; Pg. 00
Length: 542 words
Byline: By Steven Rea

Inquirer Movie Critic
Body


Anyone who cares about their children's future, indeed the planet's future, should see Merchants of Doubt. The problem is, the people who really need to see it - climate-change deniers, politicians with ties to the fossil-fuel industries, the blithely indifferent - aren't likely to. 
Robert Kenner's expert adaptation of science historians Naomi Oreskes and Erik M. Conway's book is advocacy filmmaking, a smartly packaged cautionary tale. But thanks to campaigns by lobbyists and industry organizations - the individuals and groups who give the film its title and who have been busy sowing seeds of discord in the media - disbelievers are out there, and ardent. 
Merchants of Doubt begins at the fabled Magic Castle in Hollywood, where magician Jamy Ian Swiss dazzles his audience with card tricks - sleight-of-hand, misdirection, deceit. 
What's that got to do with anything? 
Everything. 
Merchants of Doubt examines how the tobacco industry pulled off a similar con, arguing that cigarettes did not cause cancer and that nicotine was not addictive, even as their own scientists knew otherwise. Epic public-relations campaigns were launched to distract and dissuade, to find physicians and "experts" to counter the increasingly alarming studies. 
It took decades before cigarette manufacturers were forced to acknowledge the truth. 
That same strategy, according to Merchants of Doubt, is now being deployed by oil companies, coal companies, and free-marketeers who argue that climate change isn't the result of human action - that it is naturally occurring, or maybe not occurring at all. Never mind the overwhelming consensus reached by scientists. 
Never mind the rising ocean levels, extreme weather patterns, hurricanes, droughts. 
Marc Morano, an unapologetic ringleader in the movement to thwart climate-change action, pops up on news shows to challenge earnest, nerdy scientists, while an institute funded by the Koch brothers publishes "research studies" aimed at obfuscation and obstruction. Pseudo-science is just as good as real science, especially when it's delivered in tandem with get-the-government-off-our-backs slogans, rallying the troops, and railing against "liberals" such as Al Gore. 
When global-warming skeptics such as former South Carolina congressman Bob Inglis, who represented one of the reddest Red State districts in the land, change their minds, look out. Inglis started talking about the climate-change crisis, then lost his long-held seat to tea party-backed Trey Gowdy in the 2010 primary. Similarly, Michael Shermer, editor of Skeptic magazine and an avowed libertarian, read the reports and the research and came to the conclusion that climate change was for real. But when he tried to say as much to fellow libertarians, he was shouted down, often hatefully. 
Merchants of Doubt shouldn't be a hard sell. The fact that it is should make you very mad. 
  Merchants of Doubt ***1/2 (Out of four stars)
Directed by Robert Kenner. With Frederick Singer, Naomi Oreskes, Jamy Ian Swiss, James Hansen, Marc Morano, Bob Ingliss. Distributed by Sony Pictures Classics. 
Running time: 1 hour, 33 mins. 
Parent's guide: PG-13 (adult themes). 
Playing at: Ritz Bourse. 
srea@phillynews.com
 215-854-5629 
 @Steven_Rea 
www.philly.com/onmovies

Graphic

 
Sony Pictures Classics

Load-Date: March 28, 2015


End of Documen
t



How climate changes shook up history: Experts to speak
The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 12, 2008 Wednesday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: PHILADELPHIA; P-com News Local; Pg. B01
Length: 787 words
Byline: By Faye Flam

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


Between 880 and 1250 A.D., climate change allowed Europe to thrive while the Mayan civilization collapsed. In the 1400s, another climate shift led to torrential rains and crop failure in Europe, starving 1.5 million people.  
Throughout history, some civilizations weathered cold and hot spells, droughts and floods, while others were devastated. A number of researchers are trying to understand why. 
"Climate change goes back at least 400,000 years," said Brian Fagan, an emeritus anthropology professor from the University of California, Santa Barbara, "but until 10 years ago, nobody studied the impacts on ancient civilizations." 
Tonight at 7:30, Fagan and other historians, anthropologists and archaeologists will discuss their ideas about climate change in a public lecture at the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. 
Climate scientists expect something more disruptive and unpredictable than a smooth warming around the world. The coming years will likely parch some regions and soak others, just as climate changes did in the past. 
Fagan, author of The Little Ice Age and The Great Warming, said his research had led him to appreciate the complexities of climate changes. "People have no idea of the challenge of drought we face," he said. 
During the so-called Little Ice Age, he said, the biggest problem wasn't cold but storminess. Not only did floods ruin crops and cause famines, he said, but also a storm surge in 1433 killed 100,000 Europeans in low-lying areas. Later in that cold period, storms destroyed the Spanish armada. 
Climate has worked its way into the fields of archaeology and anthropology in the last 20 years as climatologists have found ways to precisely measure weather from past eras, Fagan said. Much of that information comes from ice cores taken from Greenland and Antarctica. 
There, researchers have drilled more than two miles into the ice caps to reconstruct more than 110,000 years worth of climate history.  
To read these natural records, climatologists measure the texture and composition of ice at different layers and sample pockets of ancient air left in tiny bubbles. 
The Penn Museum's director, Richard Hodges, specializes in ancient Rome - a civilization whose course was altered by several climate convulsions triggered by volcanic eruptions. An eruption around 530 A.D., for example, left a veil of dust in the air. Crops failed and economic turmoil followed for a decade.  
"That tipped some communities over the edge," Hodges said. But at the same time, the problems in Rome allowed Anglo-Saxon communities to spread south.  
"One person's pain turned out to be another person's gain," Hodges said.  
The Medieval Warm Period, from 880 to 1250, brought a combination of gain and pain, too, with the pain catastrophic for the Mayans in tropical Mexico. Political and economic changes made them more vulnerable to the climate shift, which nearly destroyed them, University of Cincinnati anthropologist Vernon Scarborough said. 
Mayan civilization had prospered for 1,500 years in a region that's still nearly uninhabitable, he said. "They had a good run" thanks to a very different social structure from that in the West. 
Because of the tropical climate, Mayan cities had just a tenth of the population density of their European counterparts. The climate made storing food and getting rid of waste hard, so people spread out and became extremely organized in moving resources around. "They had to invest in things like schedules and calendars and road systems," Scarborough said.  
People spread out through the countryside, and population grew slowly. 
But by around 700, Scarborough said, the Mayans started to change their ways of life, growing denser cities and adopting "steep, pitched hierarchies" in which a few people concentrated power and resources. 
Severe droughts then hit them between about 740 and 900, after which the population crashed below a tenth of its peak. Fields filled with sediment, and swamps reclaimed the towns. 
Advances in technological sophistication in our own time can be misleading, said Santa Barbara's Fagan. "The most fascinating thing about all of this is not that we've learned how to master climate but that we've become much more vulnerable to climate change," he said. 
Farming, irrigation, sewers and modern medicine allow our cities to accommodate millions of people, "but we are infinitely more vulnerable because we cannot move." 
Besides the impending climate threat, Scarborough said, "we have an economic system out of balance." 
"Technology can do some marvelous things," he said, "but one more widget is not going to bail us out."  
Contact staff writer Faye Flam 
at 215-854-4977 or fflam@phillynews.com. 

Graphic

 
Photograph by: Feed Loader

Load-Date: November 12, 2008


End of Documen
t



Elizabeth Fiedler, a Pa. state lawmaker and member of the Millennial generation, says climate change is the issue of our time.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 10, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: CURRENTS; Pg. C2
Length: 461 words
Byline: Elizabeth Fiedler
Body


The biggest issue facing my peers is climate change. Ecological devastation may not be the most immediate threat for most of us, most days - though it is for many displaced by hurricanes and wildfires, or poisoned by pollution in our communities. But it is the issue that tells us, unequivocally, that we're nearing the end of the path we're on.
Nearly two-fifths of Millennials report they are considering not having children because of climate change. On our current path, our children and grandchildren will inherit a Philadelphia that by 2080 is as hot as Memphis, ravaged by devastating storms like Katrina and Sandy. Philadelphia's working class, and the quarter of our city that lives in poverty, will suffer first and most as prices and temperatures rise.
My kids are 4 and 1, and they do not yet understand what the future holds. I think often of an article I read about an 11-year-old who has nightmares about the havoc climate change will wreak. We have only 11 more years to get off this path and avert catastrophe.
That immense urgency is why I left my job as a reporter to run for office, with my then 3-month-old in the baby carrier. It is why young people across this country have stepped up to demand action, despite the hesitations of politicians of both parties. This organizing fills me with hope. As a state representative representing South Philadelphia, I join them in this struggle.
Together, with a diverse coalition, we can build a path to a better future, one defined by community, cooperation, and caring for our fellow Philadelphians. We have the technology to transform our energy systems to 100 percent clean and renewable sources like wind and solar; to save energy by retrofitting and constructing more efficient buildings; to transform our agriculture and transportation systems. This work will create hundreds of thousands of skilled jobs.
In this transition, we must recognize that the fight against climate change is also a fight for economic justice. We must insist on justice for the most affected communities, and empower workers through unions and cooperative ownership. As young women struggling for equality, we also know we need a strong social foundation that includes family leave, universal health care, affordable housing, fully funded education, and retirement security. A just economic transition requires these commitments, as does a vision of the future in which our children are free.
Our lives will be dramatically altered by the new climate. Our actions now will define exactly how. Change is hard, but my generation knows that our lives, and those of our children, are on the line.
Elizabeth Fiedler serves as state representative for South Philadelphia's
184th District. She is a Millennial, born between 1981 and 1996.

Load-Date: March 10, 2019


End of Documen
t



Climate change skeptics attack Pope Francis in Phila.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 18, 2015 Friday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2015 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: PHILADELPHIA; P-com News Pope Francis in Philadelphia; Pg. B04
Length: 475 words
Byline: By Tom Avril

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


In June, Pope Francis made headlines when he challenged the world to take action against climate change and other environmental ills.
 Those who deny the scientific evidence that humans pose a threat to the climate were not amused, and on Thursday, a week before the pontiff arrives in Philadelphia, some of them struck back.
 Representatives from the Heartland Institute, a conservative Chicago-based think tank, joined the local Independence Hall Foundation and other advocates in railing against what one them called "eco-zealots."
 They spoke in a conference room at the Independence Visitor Center, a location picked for its significance. The speakers view the pope's message as tantamount to an anticapitalist infringement on U.S. independence and sovereignty. Foreigners should not be telling Americans to spend money on curbing emissions, they said.
 "This is about taxation without representation," said Elizabeth Yore, an attorney known for fighting child abuse and human trafficking.
 Gene Koprowski, Heartland's marketing director, said he and colleagues initially thought the pope had spoken about climate change because he was getting "bad advice." They now think he is inspired in part by "pagan remnants" of "nature worship" that have crept into the church, he said.
 "I think we're seeing the revelation of an animistic form in the church," Koprowski said.
 Whatever his motives, Francis is in lockstep with the scientific consensus.
 Average global surface temperatures have risen about 1.5 degrees Fahrenheit since 1800, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the global research group with ties to the United Nations. Scientists project that if the world does not restrict emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases, temperatures will rise an additional 4.7 to 8.6 degrees by century's end.
 The rising temperatures have contributed to sea-level rise and are expected to lead to heat waves and droughts, crippling poor nations without the resources to adapt, climate scientists generally agree.
 Jay H. Lehr, the Heartland's science director and a hydrologist, sought to poke holes in the science Thursday. Among other points, he said any human impact on the climate is dwarfed by natural variability in temperatures throughout Earth's history.
 Going back millions of years, that is true, but climate scientists are in near-universal agreement that human activity is the dominant factor in the temperature increase since the beginning of industrial times.
 Late in the hour-long event, attended by several reporters and a handful of onlookers, an environmental activist stood up and angrily likened the climate skeptics to Holocaust deniers. WPHT radio host Dom Giordano, who was present in support of Heartland, engaged her in a spirited argument, with neither side conceding. 
tavril@phillynews.com
  215-854-2430 @TomAvril1

Load-Date: September 18, 2015


End of Documen
t



Inquirer Editorial: Trump talking out of both sides of his mouth on climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 27, 2016 Sunday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2016 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; P-com Opinion; Pg. C04
Length: 457 words
Body


President-elect Trump, as he is prone to do, has again backed away somewhat from a previous position. He no longer calls studies of human-influenced climate change hoaxes. But neither does he embrace what scientists have confirmed: Sea-level increases, wildfires, floods, heat, glacial melting, insect infestations, droughts, and related food shortages are traceable to what humans put in the air that affects climate.
In a meeting Tuesday at the New York Times, Trump was asked if human activity was linked to climate change. "I think there is some connectivity. Some, something," he said. "It depends on how much." Trump also said he had an "open mind" about the multinational climate accords that the Obama administration helped negotiate.
The environmentalist community reacted to Trump's apparent about-face with perplexed caution. "Talk is cheap, and no one should believe Donald Trump means this until he acts upon it," said Sierra Club executive director Michael Brune. "Trump is kidding nobody on climate as he simultaneously stacks his transition team and cabinet with climate-science deniers and the dirtiest hacks the fossil-fuel industry can offer."
Throughout his campaign, Trump offered cover for polluters in the fossil-fuel industry who want to unravel environmental protections to pad their bottom lines. But climate scientists are in near consensus over the negative effects of global warming; and 74 percent of Americans want to reduce pollution, according to a Pew Research Center survey.
As president, Trump can do a lot of damage to people's health, the environment, and commerce by rolling back environmental rules. Theoretically, he could even kill the Environmental Protection Agency, if the Republican-controlled Congress went along. He certainly can pull the United States out of the Paris climate agreement, which would expose American exporters to carbon tariffs from nations that abide by the treaty.
Fortunately, there are economic and political forces far beyond a President Trump's control. The market has already embraced cleaner forms of energy. Wind and solar power are becoming more cost-effective for consumers. Progress on developing batteries that can store natural energy is very encouraging. Natural gas discoveries and improved extraction technology have made it a less expensive alternative to coal-fueled power plants.
If Trump persists with promoting the destructive policies he espoused during his campaign, it will be up to the individual states to enact stronger rules to keep our air clean. Trump would better serve the nation by encouraging clean energy, which not only can save the planet from the devastating effects of climate change, it also can provide many of those good-paying jobs he promised.

Load-Date: November 27, 2016


End of Documen
t



ExxonMobil shareholders vote 'yes' on climate-change analysis, including Vanguard
The Philadelphia Inquirer
June 1, 2017 Thursday, WEB Edition


Copyright 2017 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: WEB; Inq Col Erin Arvedlund; Pg. WEB
Length: 969 words
Byline: Erin Arvedlund
Body


When ExxonMobil Corp. shareholders voted for a historic climate-change resolution Wednesday, mutual-fund giant Vanguard and small investors such as Sister Nora Nash were among them.
ExxonMobil s board recommended voting against the resolution, proposed by Sister Nora and  like-minded faith-based investors. Yet it passed, with 62 percent of shareholders voting  yes  on the call for a  2-degree scenario  analysis, which, as 195 countries have agreed to under the 2016 Paris Agreement, seeks to prevent the Earth from heating up by more than 2 degrees Celsius since the start of the industrial age. (So far, it s up about 1.1 degrees Celsius.)
Asset managers Vanguard, BlackRock, and State Street represent ExxonMobil s three largest shareholders, with roughly 7, 6, and 5 percent of shares outstanding, respectively.
Almost every investor has heard of Vanguard, the Malvern-based, $4 trillion indexing powerhouse founded by John Bogle, an advocate for low-fee investing. According to Bloomberg data, Vanguard owns 299 million shares of ExxonMobil.
Fewer have likely heard of Sister Nora. She s no ordinary nun   she is director of corporate responsibility for the Sisters of St. Francis of Philadelphia. id="attachment_15506"  class="wp-caption alignright"> class="wp-caption-text">Sister Nora Nash, of the Aston-based Sisters of St. Francis, helped propose a climate-change shareholder proposal at ExxonMobil that passed on Wednesday. The nuns own 5,900 shares in their retirement fund. The largest institutional shareholder is Vanguard, with 299 million shares. (INTERFAITH CENTER ON CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY)>>
The religious order, based in Aston, Delaware County, owns about 5,900 ExxonMobil shares in its retirement fund. The sisters also own Chevron, Anadarko, Chesapeake Energy, Southern Co., and Marathon Oil shares.
 We know the oil and gas industry isn t going away, but we re putting a lot of pressure on them,  Sister Nora said in an interview.  They have been extremely slow to recognize the 2-degree scenario coming from the Paris climate accord. If we don t stay below 2 degrees, our world will be more troubled because of greenhouse-gas emissions. 
Vanguard reportedly had been considering voting for the climate-change resolution, but on Wednesday declined to comment on how it voted. At past shareholders meetings, Vanguard generally votes with ExxonMobil management, but has sometimes voted against.
Faith-based shareholders said Blackrock and Vanguard likely voted for the proposal.
 The vote was 38.1 percent last year for the same proposal, and 62.3 percent this year,  said Christina Cobourn Herman of the Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility (ICCR), an activist group of asset managers and religious leaders who advocate responsible investing and corporate governance.
Together, Vanguard, Blackrock and State Street own 18 percent of ExxonMobil.  I don t know how we could have gotten that vote level without all three of these large funds, unless there are other very large shareholders out there that we aren t aware of,  she said.
It was Sister Nora and those faith-based investors who put forth the climate-change resolution. Her religious order is a member of the ICCR.
Wednesday s shareholders meeting in Dallas was the first for ExxonMobil s new CEO, Darren Woods, as head of the company. Woods took over at the start of the year after longtime chief executive Rex Tillerson retired to serve as President Trump s secretary of state.
In remarks to the shareholders, Woods said,  We must also be mindful of the environment. We expect global CO2 emissions to peak and gradually decline by 2035. 
Prior to the meeting, Woods wrote a letter to the president, urging him to keep the United States in the Paris climate agreement. Reports out of Washington on Wednesday suggested that Trump is leaning toward pulling the United States out of the accord.
 I want to thank you for writing that letter, and it s for this reason I m very grateful,  Sister Pat Daly, of the Dominican Sisters of Caldwell, N.J., told Woods. She is executive director of the Tri-State Coalition for Responsible Investments, which comprises 40 Catholic institutions, mostly congregations of sisters and priests, who assist investors in engaging with companies, educating their members, and connecting investment activity with Catholic social teaching.
In response, Woods said:  The Paris framework involves countries all around the world, and it s very important. 
This isn t the first time Sister Nora has tangled with a Standard & Poor s 500 corporate giant. She and the Sisters of St. Francis are invested in Wells Fargo, and as part of Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility, they condemned the bank and demanded a deeper investigation into the bank s cross-selling activities in October. As the Wells Fargo scandal involving the opening of two million accounts by retail banking employees without customers  knowledge unfolded, the ICCR passed resolutions expressing disappointment in the bank.
 At our meeting with Wells representatives last December, we pressed for disclosure and we were denied the truth,  Sister Nora said in a news release from ICCR last year.  We are confronted with painful accounts of fraud including some 80,000 customers in Pennsylvania alone. As shareholders and customers ourselves, we feel betrayed and have no choice but to call for a full review of business standards through this resolution, which we hope other shareholders will support. 
Though environmentalists declared the ExxonMobil vote a victory,  it is nonbinding,  noted Dan Wiener, a longtime Vanguard investor and  Brooklyn-based publisher of the Independent Adviser for Vanguard Investors newsletter.  This is a safe vote for all the institutional investors like BlackRock and Vanguard, since it doesn t do very much.  

Load-Date: June 23, 2017


End of Documen
t



States take on environmental issues; Several are firming up policies on climate change and drilling, despite Trump's regulation rollbacks
The Philadelphia Inquirer
May 26, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL WEEKLY; Pg. K8
Length: 1025 words
Byline: BY BRADY DENNIS AND JULIET EILPERIN
Body


ABSTRACT
Several are firming up policies on climate change and drilling, despite Trump's regulation rollbacks
More than a dozen states are moving to strengthen environmental protections to combat a range of issues from climate change to water pollution, opening a widening rift between stringent state policies and the Trump administration's deregulatory agenda.
In recent months, Hawaii, New York and California have moved to ban a widely used agricultural pesticide linked to neurological problems in children, even as the administration has resisted such restrictions. Michigan and New Jersey are pushing to restrict a ubiquitous class of chemical compounds that have turned up in drinking water, saying they can no longer wait for the Environmental Protection Agency to take action.
Colorado and New Mexico have adopted new policies targeting greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuel drilling and limiting where these operations can take place. And more than a dozen states have adopted policies that would force automakers to produce more fuel-efficient cars than required by federal standards.
The growing patchwork of regulations is creating uncertainty for American businesses as state lawmakers vie to change rules that, in past administrations, were more likely to be set at the federal level.
Local officials say the jumble of policies also threatens to create disparities, not only in obligations placed on businesses but also in the level of protections guarding human health in different communities.
"It is difficult to communicate to your customers that New Jersey or Minnesota or Vermont has evaluated the risk to their residents differently, and that one state places a lower value on protection of public health than another," Brian Steglitz, the water treatment manager for Ann Arbor, Mich., said recently in testimony before a panel of the U.S. House Energy and Commerce Committee.
Since President Trump took office, his administration has scaled back numerous environmental rules enacted under President Barack Obama and declined to impose federal limits on some contaminants and pesticides. The Trump administration also has reversed course on climate change, refusing to embrace the limits on greenhouse gas emissions that the federal government previously had pledged to adopt under an international agreement.
In an interview, EPA Administrator Andrew Wheeler said the federal government regularly works hand-in-hand with the states, which often are the more appropriate forum for litigating such environmental matters. For example, he said, the Trump administration has allowed many states to shape their own strategies for meeting air quality standards, rather than imposing a federal plan.
"Overall, we try to defer to the states as much as possible," Wheeler said - though he added that the administration would oppose state action that would "interfere with national commerce" or "create uncertainties for consumers or for businesses."
At the Interior Department, which controls industry access to vast swaths of public lands, spokeswoman Molly Block said in an email that the administration views its more business-friendly approach as a key contributor to the nation's vibrant economic growth under Trump.
"We will continue our work to advance President Trump's deregulatory agenda, which has boosted the American economy," she said.
In some states - especially those newly under Democratic control - the federal approach has created a vacuum that other officials have rushed to fill. For example, when New Mexico Gov. Michelle Lujan Grisham (D) replaced a Republican in the governor's mansion earlier this year, one of her first acts was to sign an executive order focused on climate change. It instructs regulators to develop statewide limits on greenhouse gas emissions and a more stringent renewable energy requirement for New Mexico's power sector.
"A lot of what you see in that executive order reflects a lack of action on the federal level," said Sarah Cottrell Propst, secretary of the New Mexico Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources Department. "The state is feeling like we need to fill the gap."
States also are taking the lead on chemical and pesticide regulation because the EPA in some cases has held off on setting exposure limits or banning some substances outright.
At least a half-dozen states have pushed forward with plans to limit a class of compounds known as polyfluoroalkyl and perfluoroalkyl substances, or PFAS, saying ample evidence exists to regulate them. The lab-made compounds have long been used in consumer products such as nonstick pans, water-repellent fabrics and firefighting foams.
Long-term exposure has been associated with an array of health problems, including thyroid disease, weakened immunity, infertility and certain cancers, though researchers continue to study the human health implications.
Catherine McCabe, an EPA veteran, is now the top environmental official in New Jersey, which has proposed one of the nation's most stringent standards for PFAS in drinking water.
McCabe said it would be better for the nation and for industry if the federal government set a single national limit for PFAS in drinking water. Given the health threat, however, McCabe said the need for action is urgent.
"I would love to wait if [federal officials] were moving quickly, but they are not," she said. "We can't wait any longer."
One of the most pressing splits is unfolding in the auto industry, as the EPA and the Transportation Department prepare to finalize a rollback of tighter tailpipe standards for cars and smaller pickup trucks. Last year, the Trump administration proposed freezing federal mileage requirements between model years 2020 and 2026, rather than boosting them to require that vehicles get more than 50 miles per gallon, as was required under Obama administration rules.
California, which has received federal waivers in the past to set its own rules, has pledged to press ahead with the tighter standards regardless of what the White House decides. Thirteen states and the District of Columbia are poised to adopt California's standards if they diverge from the federal government's.

Load-Date: May 26, 2019


End of Documen
t



Commentary: GOP leaders needed for climate-change cause
The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 31, 2017 Tuesday, WEB Edition


Copyright 2017 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: WEB; P-com Opinion; Pg. 00
Length: 644 words
Byline: By Steve Harvey
Body


The Trump administration is not even two weeks old, and there is plenty of cause for concern. The list is growing and includes climate-change references excised from the White House web site, escalating tension with the news media, the announcement that the president will not release his tax returns ever, his order to begin construction of a border wall with Mexico, the travel ban affecting certain Muslim countries, and, probably by the time this goes to press, a conservative Supreme Court nominee.
The historic women's marches in Washington and cities around the country were designed to keep the pressure on President Trump, and that seems to have worked, so far. Whatever else, this sure is going to be interesting to watch.
As we watch, we have to think about how to respond. Many are pledging continued defiance, lawsuits, and ongoing commentary on social media. That's all perfectly appropriate. Trump must answer to the people, not just his supporters, and he must obey the law. If he doesn't, he can expect a backlash. This might even include impeachment at some point if he falls out of favor with enough Republican voters to convince the leaders in Congress that they must act for the good of the country.
Meanwhile, those of us who didn't support Trump must reckon with the reality that, at the end of the day, we are going to need the support of a lot of those Republicans if we ever want real change on the issues most important to us.
At the top of that list is action on climate change, which President Barack Obama made a priority in his second term. But even he was unable to get any real momentum going on it. He relied on administrative action and executive orders, because Congress would not go along.
It's safe to say that Hillary Clinton, if she had been elected, would have fared no better, because there will be no serious effort to substantially reduce and soon eliminate our reliance on fossil fuels unless a substantial number of Republican voters embrace the concept. They should, not just because of the grave danger of continued global warming, but also because of the opportunity to transform our economy by leading the world in clean-energy technology. The economic possibilities are staggering.
Still, we have a long way to go to sell this to the American people and to Congress, and that starts with Republican support. We already have 10 courageous Republicans in the House who have joined the Congressional Climate Solutions Caucus, including three from Pennsylvania (Reps. Pat Meehan, Ryan Costello, and Brian Fitzpatrick). But we are going to need a lot more GOP leaders on climate change, and soon, because we don't have time to wait until Democrats control Congress again. This is critical to the future for our children and grandchildren.
So as we respond to the Trump administration, let's not forget that we have a real need to make nice, not with the president, but with many of his supporters as well as conservatives and moderates who did not support him. We cannot afford to view politics as blood sport, as we fantasize about getting even with those we have come to hate because they chose Trump over Clinton. That's a luxury we cannot afford.
Let's instead take our cue from two of our greatest presidents. Abraham Lincoln said that "if you would win a man to your cause, first convince him that you are his sincere friend." No one today lives that better than Obama, who repeatedly turns his cheek and inspires us with the love of country he shows by keeping his tone polite. It's hard to do, but we have no choice if we want to preserve the future. It just might help with other important issues too.
What do we have to lose? Oh yeah, everything.
Steve Harvey is a lawyer in Philadelphia and the president of A Call to the Bar: Lawyers for Common Sense on Climate Change (www.calltothebar.org). steve@steveharveylaw.com

Graphic

 
BRYAN ANSELM / For the Washington Post

Load-Date: February 1, 2017


End of Documen
t



Survey finds a disconnect on climate change and Latinos; Outreach is often lacking despite awareness among ethnic group.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
July 27, 2018 Friday


Copyright 2018 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: THE REGION; Pg. B3
Length: 1071 words
Byline: Jesenia De Moya Correa STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
Outreach is often lacking despite awareness among ethnic group.
Since its creation in 2008, Philadelphia's Office of Sustainability had been poor at outreach.
While it focused on its internal operations - working on the policies that regulate energy consumption; access to food, air and water; and carbon emissions reduction by 2050 - it rarely included the insights of local residents or connect with neighborhood projects. And the office wasn't thinking about reaching specific communities, like Latinos, either.
It turns out this is not specific to Philadelphia. According to a June study out of Yale University, a large percentage of U.S. Latinos (72 percent Spanish speakers; 63 percent English speakers) have never been contacted by an environmental organization working to reduce global warming or tackle climate change.
It's afinding with significant implications when you consider that a 2017 survey showed that Latinos - particularly those who prefer to speak Spanish - care more and are more aware of the issue than African Americans, Native Americans, Pacific Islanders, Asian Americans, and Caucasians.
Anthony Leiserowitz, the study's main author and director of Yale's Program on Climate Change Communication, said he and his colleagues began researching the topic about 10 years ago when they became curious about ethnic groups that care most about climate change. What they found is U.S. Latinos are far less likely to act politically on global warming - one reason being because they've never been engaged by an organization working on the issue.
"The common wisdom then, and even today, is that it's an issue that only 'upper-middle class, white, latte-sipping liberals' care about. It turns out that that's just not true," Leiserowitz said, adding that other global studies suggest that Latinos of North, Central, and South America also rate global warming as a higher personal threat that any other region. "We still don't really know why."
Mark Magaña, the CEO and founding president of Green Latinos, said Latinos are inherently conservation minded. Still, the 8,000-member advocacy organization out of Washington, D.C., formed six years ago to harness the habits of these communities, he said.
"Latinos learn their stewardship of the land through their grandmothers and parents," Magaña said. "They eat all the food on the plate, turn off the light when they leave the room, eat all the parts of the animal, use water wisely because it might not come the next day; things that we do organically, because it's in the back of the chanclas," he explained, using a phrase that best translates as "back of your mind" but alludes to the Spanish word for flip flops, a cultural touchstone because they're ubiquitous - to wear, even to discipline with.
Still, Green Latinos had no experience with local outreach efforts. So it partnered last year with Moms Clean Air Force, a national coalition of parents who wanted to reach Latinos in a more "culturally competent" way, said national field director Karin Quimby, especially after its own poll showed that women of color, particularly Latina grandmothers and mothers, were even more concerned than white women about climate and pollution.
"The poll confirmed what we knew," Quimby said. "The environmental movement as a whole hasn't done good work with communities of color."
The result - Ecomadres, which will help get resources to Latinas already doing local advocacy work - is rare in a U.S. movement that's predominantly white. A 2014 study of 280 environmental institutions found that less than 16 percent of the board or staff at mainstream NGOs, foundations, and government agencies identified as part of an ethnic minority.
In Philadelphia, the only group targeting Latinos in a coalition of more than 90 stakeholders that engage with residents on climate change issues, is Asociación Puertorriqueños en Marcha (APM), which works on projects such as the Sustainable Communities Initiative and Paseo Verde.
Victoria Cubillos-Cañón, APM's neighborhood advisory committee coordinator, explained that the best outreach methods prioritize a residents' needs.
"We have learned to create conversations around the main problem and the layers that relate to their problems," Cubillos-Cañón said. For instance, APM might interest a homeowner about installing water retention systems like rain barrels by framing it around how to lower water bills.
Cubillos-Cañón shares that message with pastors before Mass, with a list of about 50 block captains, on fliers she places on the stoops and window frames of homeowners.
The city's Office of Sustainability recognized its outreach efforts needed work, especially after input for its sustainability plan for 2016 showed people wanted to be included in the process. In fact, director Christine Knapp said the office had never had a community outreach strategist until May.
"We haven't engaged Latinos, and we haven't engaged with any community sufficiently well on these issues," Knapp said.
Ciara Williams, the outreach strategist, will be working full-time on a number of sustainability programs, including The Heat Vulnerability Index, a pilot project that launched Wednesday with the intent to reduce temperatures in neighborhoods. Hunting Park in North Philadelphia, for example, is one of the hottest spots, and is largely populated by African American and Latino communities.
To engage those residents, the city partnered with two neighborhood organizations with connections to Hunting Park's west side (the Lenfest Center) and east side (Esperanza). Esperanza already has a network of volunteers for outreach, so for the index, those volunteers might ask residents whether they need more trees, know how white roofs can cool structures, or understand how heat affects health.
Celita Campos, a Hunting Park resident of 20 years, was contacted by Esperanza two years ago, the first time she had ever heard from an environmental organization. It was a meeting that helped her realize how certain factors were contributing to her children's health: three of four whom suffer from asthma, she said.
She eventually became a volunteer for beautification projects, and plans to join Esperanza in its work on the heat index.
"This is for the sake of my children," said Campos, 44, "and [the community] needs their [the city's] support to watch our families thrive in a positive way."
JDeMoyaCorrea@philly.com
215-854-5605
@JeseniaDeMoyaC

Load-Date: September 28, 2018


End of Documen
t



A Philadelphia rally cry to feed off Paris climate change pact
The Philadelphia Inquirer
December 20, 2015 Sunday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2015 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: PHILADELPHIA; P-com News; Pg. B02
Length: 459 words
Byline: By Michaelle Bond

Staff Writer
Body


A week after world officials reached a historic agreement in Paris to limit greenhouse gas emissions to fight climate change, a group of local environmental activists gathered Saturday in Philadelphia to energize each other for the city's role.
 "It will come down to the local [levels] and states to really lead the way," said Anthony Giancatarino, director of the energy democracy program at the Center for Social Inclusion. "We actually have a huge role to play."
 The international agreement gives Philadelphia "a backdrop to be ambitious" in its actions to curb climate change, said Giancatarino, who is also chair of the policy committee at Green Justice Philly.
 Eleven local environmental groups hosted a discussion with two activists who went to Paris for the United Nations conference: Giancatarino and Poune Saberi, a member of Mayor-elect Jim Kenney's committee on the environment and sustainability. They spoke to about 100 members of environmental groups Saturday afternoon at the Friends Center.
 Saberi said voters should refuse to support candidates who back the use of fossil fuels. Local green groups reiterated their opposition to refineries in the region. Groups plan to march during the Democratic National Convention in July to call for a fracking ban and a transition to renewable energy.
 The agreement 195 countries reached at the climate change conference includes limiting global temperature rise, investing in sustainable energy and submitting climate plans every five years.
 Officials have said Philadelphia will experience warmer temperatures and wetter weather as a result of climate change.
 "Philadelphia is at a crossroads right now," said Matt Walker, community outreach director for the Clean Air Council.
 The city can either quickly transition to renewable energy to work toward being the greenest city in the country - long a stated goal of the Nutter administration - or, Walker said, the city can continue to build up fossil fuel facilities. "We want to make sure the time and public resources being spent on Philadelphia's energy future are directed toward the healthy, safe, and clean energy options," he said.
 Mayor Nutter pledged support for the United Nations agreement, saying cities are "on the front lines."
 "With a new agreement now in place, cities will be central to developing and implementing solutions to meet national and international carbon reduction and clean energy targets," he said Monday in a statement.
 As the sun set Saturday, about 30 attendees of the Philadelphia summit stood outside LOVE Park and Dilworth Plaza to sing carols with environmentally altered lyrics, including "Solar Cells," "Dreaming of a Green Future," and "I Have a Little Windmill."
mbond@philly.com
  610-313-8207 @MichaelleBond

Graphic

 
Photograph by: John Duchneskie

Load-Date: December 20, 2015


End of Documen
t



Big wake-up to global warming; An attitude shift as inexorable as climate change itself this year brought world groups together to debate risks.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
December 24, 2007 Monday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2007 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: FEATURES MAGAZINE; Inq Health & Science; Pg. D01
Length: 1072 words
Byline: By Sandy Bauers

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


As the ice melted, the issue gelled. 
This was the year that global warming hit the mass radar screen, driven by a drumbeat of catastrophic predictions from top scientists, a jaw-dropping acceleration in polar ice melt, Al Gore's Oscar - and then his Nobel. 
His prize showed how important the issue was. His cameo on NBC's 30 Rock showed how mainstream it was.  
As recently as 2003, when climatologist Heidi Cullen began her 90-second spots on the Weather Channel, global warming seemed fringe. 
Now, her program is an hour, and global warming is a dinner-table topic coast to coast. "It's found its way into basic American dialogue," Cullen says. 
When sea-level researcher Benjamin Horton talked climate change in 2006, his University of Pennsylvania students yawned.  
This year, same class, seismically different evaluations. They "think it is the most important thing for science to understand," Horton says. 
Indeed, researchers say, most Americans now understand the potential of global warming to affect every facet of society: energy production and use, population growth, water resources, storms, droughts, human health. 
Few missed the import of the Nobel. It was the peace prize, a nod to fears of famine, environmental refugees and wars over water and other resources. 
In years to come, climate change seems certain to alter America's very way of life - the houses people live in, the cars they drive. 
This was the year world communities came together to debate the problem.  
Washington vacillated - but states acted, often led by California's example. 
Unlikely bedfellows - eco groups and corporations like DuPont, Dow and Ford - formed a climate partnership to demand government action. 
Religious leaders ratcheted up the rhetoric. 
Six hundred stalwarts stood naked on a glacier in the Swiss Alps. 
And us? The gas-guzzling, thermostat-wielding public? 
We bought energy-saving compact fluorescent lightbulbs - enough that Wal-Mart reached its year-end sales goal of 100 million by Oct. 2. 
Some even took public transit to the Live Earth concerts on climate change. 
"It was a cover story everywhere," says Greenpeace research director Kert Davies. "It was in your lap, in the dentist's office, on local news." 
Attitudes continued a shift seemingly as inexorable as climate change itself. 
According to a new GlobeScan poll, 65 percent of Americans believe climate change will directly threaten them and their families.  
"We have what is essentially a global consensus that it's a problem, it's real, and people are willing to make a change in their lifestyles and accept increased cost of energy," says Steven Kull, director of worldpublicopinion.org. 
Particularly intriguing, Kull says, is that in many countries - notably India, China and the United States - citizens don't think the government is doing enough. 
What's not clear is whether this translates into personal action. Kull says people have a "virtue quota" for all the things they think they ought to be doing, from eating better to promoting human rights. 
With so many demands, they want governments, individuals, corporations - everyone - to share the global-warming burden. 
Nearly half of Americans feel guilty about their contributions to climate change, the GlobeScan poll found. But more than half feel confident technology will come to the rescue.  
Meanwhile, news of global warming piled up relentlessly throughout 2007. 
The U.N.'s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change - later to share the Nobel prize with Gore - released four exhaustive documents, each bleaker than its predecessor, all but sealing with epoxy the case that global warming exists and is caused by human activity.  
In consensus reports widely viewed as conservative, the panel's thousands of scientists outlined an apocalyptic potential for buried coastlines, mass extinctions and spreading disease. 
"This is as much as scientists will ever yell and scream from the rooftops," says Greenpeace's Davies. 
What perhaps resonated most was a flurry of reports about the decline of polar ice in summer - likewise the penguins and polar bears that live on it. 
At the end of this year's Arctic melt season, the National Snow and Ice Data Center found that sea ice receded to its smallest area since satellite measurements began in 1979 - suggesting a sharp acceleration of warming's impact. 
The fabled Northwest Passage - a route atop Alaska and Canada, shortcutting the Suez and Panama Canals - opened briefly.  
The U.S. Coast Guard is mulling a frontier base as mineral prospectors, oil seekers and scientists rush poleward. 
Tourists, too. They are clambering ashore to see penguins waddle in Antarctica and to watch ice melt at Greenland's Ilulissat ice fjord, notorious for its big drip. (Air Greenland began nonstops from the United States this year, out of Baltimore.) 
Ultimately, says Davies, it all led to "a huge year for changes in the zeitgeist," which made it possible for Congress to pass an energy bill, however watered-down, that President Bush signed last week. 
Pennsylvania, with the third-highest greenhouse-gas emissions in the United States, now buys 30 percent of energy used in state facilities from renewable sources, making it the largest state purchaser.  
The largest solar-power facility in the eastern United States, announced in August, will rise in Bucks County. 
Both Pennsylvania and New Jersey joined California in adopting tailpipe-emissions standards for greenhouse gases. Washington thwarted that move last week, and it's headed to court. 
Gov. Corzine signed an order to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions 80 percent by 2050. "We can't let the momentum stop," vows state Environmental Protection Commissioner Lisa Jackson. 
Nine days ago, at the U.N. climate summit in Bali, came international agreement - sort of - on a road map for two more years of talks over who has to bite the biggest bullet. 
"It was a decision to decide," says Eileen Claussen, president of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change, but significant nonetheless, if only because "developing countries showed a new willingness to be part of something." 
Tipping point is not a phrase she uses easily. She nevertheless thinks it may apply to 2007 and global warming, which may become a defining issue of our time. 
Deciding what to do about it will mark "the beginning of the end game," she says. 
One way or another. 
Contact staff writer Sandy Bauers at 215-854-5147 or sbauers@phillynews.com.  

Graphic

 
Photograph by: Feed Loader

Load-Date: December 24, 2007


End of Documen
t



Using artwork to address climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
April 16, 2014 Wednesday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2014 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Inq World & Nation; Pg. A03
Length: 786 words
Byline: By Sandy Bauers

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


For Horsham sculptor Paula Winokur, a defining moment came when she was in a small boat in Alaska, viewing a glacier. Suddenly, the whole front of it calved off.
 "It was an overwhelming experience," she later recalled.
 For Philadelphia sculptor and furniture maker Peter Handler, an altered planet was more of a gradual realization. And when the recession brought about a slowing of commissions for his custom furniture, a friend suggested it was an opportunity to pursue what he wanted.
 Both realized they had to address climate change through their art.
 Winokur now makes stark porcelain forms that suggest icebergs and glaciers. Several are in museum collections.
 Handler began a series of pieces that represent a coral reef, endangered toads, and Maldives, an Indian Ocean nation threatened by sea-level rise.
 Wednesday night, both are participating in a panel discussion about how artists can inform - and inspire - discussions and action on climate change. 
 It's the inaugural event of "Honoring the Future," a project of the nonprofit Open Space Institute that seeks to "harness the power of art to educate, empower and engage the public" on the topic.
 "Artists have the ability to communicate about climate change in ways other than science," said Handler, one of the founders of the group. "Artists reach people's emotions."
 In other words, their work provides another entry point for people whose eyes glaze over at the mention of how experts are now measuring up to 400 parts per million of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, up from 280 in the late 1700s. 
 "I think artists have an enormous amount to contribute to this discussion," said Fran Dubrowski, an environmental attorney and educator in Washington who is the group's project director.
 She likens climate change art, which Handler and others say is a rapidly growing field, to the music of the 1960s that "propelled a lot of cultural change."
 "Here, the visual component is what's so important," Dubrowski said. "Most Americans don't get to the Arctic or Antarctica. . . . It's really hard for them to sit someplace and understand the scope of what is happening."
 But "when you see time lapse photographs" of a glacier gradually shrinking - as photographer James Balog has done - or "when someone does a chalk line that shows you where the water line is going to be," - as Eve Mosher has done - "you can see it, you can feel it, you can understand it. That's what artists do."
 Mosher, a New York artist, is taking her water line project to Kensington, Fishtown, and Port Richmond at noon April 27, starting at 2701 Castor Ave. 
 That event is part of an exhibit linking art and climate change at the Chemical Heritage Foundation on Chestnut Street.
 Artists' works there interpret rainfall, winds, the Delaware estuary and glaciers. Last fall, outside the Wilma Theater, a light show called "Particle Falls" by digital media artist Angela Polli provided a real-time visualization of air quality data.
 It opened last July, and so far has shown that art can provoke different kinds of discussions, said the project leader, Jody Roberts, who also is director of the foundation's Institute for Research.
 Roberts said ever-more-precise scientific measurements have "yielded all sorts of wonderful knowledge about the world. But that's very different from experiencing things. And the art helps to make that connection."
 "The idea is to break up the aggregate into smaller pieces. Having a debate about climate change is too big. But having a discussion about what our experiences are and our daily lives is something we can all participate in."
 Handler long ago switched from fiction to reading about climate change. He's also become a climate change activist.
 And then there's his art. "To me, part of it is creating beauty, and engaging people in the work that I do," he said. "Then they get into it. And then they get the message."
 Winokur, meanwhile, has traveled to Greenland to see more glaciers and icebergs. She considers herself "a subtle activist. My feeling is I want to make this work and bring it into the gallery and have people say, 'oh yeah, I should think about that.' That's my hope."
 Tonight's discussion will begin at 7 p.m. in the South America Room of International House, 3701 Chestnut St. Panelists include Winokur, Mosher, Handler and Lillian Ball, an environmental artist who designs storm water management projects. Admission is free. For more, www.honoringthefuture.org
sbauers@phillynews.com
  215-854-5147 @sbauers
www.inquirer.com/greenspace
UN panel shows who's responsible for CO2 emissions
UN climate report balances science and politics
http://www.philly.com/philly/news/science/20140412_ap_98464d0bd3a642c084012cd7083c9559.html

Load-Date: April 16, 2014


End of Documen
t



Rutgers fish surveys show effects of climate change - Correction Appended
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 22, 2013 Sunday, CITY-D Edition


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2013 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: front_page; Inq World & Nation; Pg. A01
Length: 1463 words
Byline: By Sandy Bauers

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


On a dark night in the middle of a wide marsh near Tuckerton, N.J., a team of Rutgers University researchers lowered a net over the railing of an old wooden bridge.
 Then they turned off their flashlights and waited. Below, in Little Sheepshead Creek, the incoming tide was washing hundreds of tiny fish larvae into the net.
 By now - 24 years after these weekly surveys began - Rutgers ichthyologist Ken Able is seeing the unmistakable effects of warming oceans and climate change.
 Especially in the last decade, the researchers have been seeing more southern species, including the larvae of grouper, a fish common in Florida.
 At the same time, they've been capturing fewer northern species, such as winter flounder.
 The changes Able is recording at Little Sheepshead Creek, near Great Bay, are reflected along the East Coast and worldwide. They have the potential not only to alter ecosystems, but also to change the seafood on our dinner plates.
 Out on Jersey's beaches, where Atlantic croaker catches used to be a rarity - this was considered the northern end of the fish's range - anglers now commonly reel them in.
 "As far as fishermen are concerned, climate change is here. This is a reality," said Tom Fote, of the Jersey Coast Anglers Association. "We're going to have to change the way we fish." 
 Mackerel, once an important species for Cape May's commercial boats, have moved north, out of reach.
 Within the last two decades, New Jersey's renowned surf clams, once common just off the beaches and harvested for chowder and fried clams, have moved 40 miles offshore into deeper, cooler water.
 "The environment is changing. Our critters are moving because they have to," said David Wallace, who heads Wallace & Associates, a consulting firm to the fishing industry.
 Many factors could be at work, fisheries experts say. Ocean currents and fishing pressure itself affect where fish go. And as anyone who chases fish for fun or a paycheck knows, huge natural variability is a given.
 But what tells researchers that climate change is likely a significant factor is much simpler. It's temperature.
 Temperature is one of the most important environmental influences for marine organisms, affecting their metabolism, growth, and other factors.
 "A couple degrees of difference will cause fish to move," said Jeff Kaelin of Lund's Fisheries in Cape May, whose boats target 20 species. "There are very narrow niches where they survive."
 While Able has been collecting his larvae, other researchers have been monitoring the water temperature at a nearby boat basin. Amid year-to-year variability, the overall trend is clear: The water is warming. For 12 of the last 15 years, temperatures have been above average.
 The same thing has been happening out on the northeast coast's continental shelf. In 2012, sea surface temperatures hit their highest in 150 years of recorded history.
'Big schools' 
Able, bearded and friendly, started the larvae project because he hoped to learn more about summer flounder, a valuable commercial species.
 What he now sees is a steady progression of newcomer fish.
 "Things are changing. People who spend a lot of time on the water know this," he said. Anglers are catching Atlantic trigger fish and sheepshead. "Big schools of cow-nosed rays are here," he said.
 Some of the fish Able and his researchers collected were just oddities, swept northward by the Gulf Stream, and didn't survive the winter. 
 "Now, our winters are milder. They're surviving," Able said. "And they're growing up to reproduce and be harvested."
 It's not just New Jersey. More broadly, a 2009 study found that about half the 36 fish stocks off the northeast coast of the U.S. were shifting northward or seaward, into deeper, cooler water.
 What was important about the paper, said NOAA fisheries expert and coauthor Jon Hare, is that it charted not only commercial fisheries - since fishing itself has an effect - but also fish that were not.
 In a study in the journal Nature in May, scientists analyzed global catch data and found that hauls were already changing, favoring warm-water species.
 "Climate change is suddenly an unexpected guest at dinner," wrote Mark Payne of the National Institute for Aquatic Resources in Denmark in an accompanying commentary.
 Overall, the effects on New Jersey's $200 million-a-year commercial fishing industry aren't as dramatic, the exit of mackerel and surf clams notwithstanding. The state is a midpoint for the range of a lot of fish, so even if they shift, New Jersey still has the species.
 But at $3.60 a gallon for fuel, adding extra miles to get to the fish - or finding them in the first place - is significant.
 Many commercial species have been overfished and are subject to management plans aimed at rebuilding their stocks. Without adequate rebuilding, some experts have predicted an end to commercial fisheries - and readily available seafood - within the century.
 Fisheries managers already dole out state-by-state allotments, a political as well as a scientific challenge. 
 The industry worries that regulations will change in response to conditions that, evidently, are very much in flux.
 In recent discussions on mackerel, said Lund's Kaelin, "we argued strenuously that we not have our quota reduced because of climate change. With a few cold winters, the fish could come back."
 Black sea bass, common in New Jersey waters, are now being seen far to the north. "Potentially, Rhode Island or Massachusetts may be arguing for a bigger piece of the pie," said Patrick Campfield, director of fisheries science for the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission, one of many coastal management agencies.
 When officials started assessing summer flounder distribution in the 1970s, it was found mostly from South Jersey into Virginia. Now, the core is off northern New Jersey, and the fish have extended their range into New York. Juveniles have been caught off Rhode Island.
 Not all species will be winners like croaker, whose juveniles need warm water to survive. Cod, whose productivity declines at higher temperatures, will be a loser.
 Also, other effects of climate change - all of which could affect fish - are becoming apparent. Changing ocean temperatures have influenced blooms of fish food - plankton - and the range and abundance of fish predators.
 Data show the waters off the northeast continental shelf are becoming more acidic. The northernmost waters are becoming less salty, suggesting the influence of melting Arctic and Greenland ice.
 In August, the published results of a three-year worldwide project showed that warming oceans are causing not only shifts in fish ranges, but also changes in breeding times.
 "What it reveals is that the changes that are occurring on land are being matched by the oceans," said British researcher and lead author Camille Parmesan, of Plymouth University. "And far from being a buffer and displaying more minor changes, what we're seeing is a far stronger response from the oceans."
Awed by the potential 
Late at night, back in the Rutgers lab near Tuckerton, heads bent over clear casserole dishes, researchers sort through the night's haul with forceps, plucking out tiny creatures that are little more than two eyeballs atop inch-long transparent bodies. 
 Able and his team have amassed the most comprehensive data set of its kind on the coast, Able said. It's crucial to understanding the long-term trends.
 At the beginning, Able struggled to find the money. "Everyone wants long-term data, but no one wants to fund it," he said. Then, as the trend began to emerge, he knew he had no choice but to continue.
 In a room at the lab, an old Coast Guard station deep in the marsh, are hundreds of vials of larvae, preserved in alcohol. In a nearby warehouse are thousands more: Each specimen they've ever caught in a quarter century.
 Able isn't sure of the count. But he's awed by the potential.
 Even on something as small as a larvae, scientists can examine the otolith - akin to an ear bone - and can tell how old the fish is. They can analyze the organ for substances showing where it has been and whether the waterway was polluted. 
 To him, the collection is a vast time series, and potentially a road map to climate changes we're already experiencing, just waiting to be understood.
 THE SEAS' CHANGE 
 Northern fish species becoming less abundant in larvae surveys:
 Grubby
 Furbeard rockling
 Threespine stickleback
 Snake blenny
 *Winter flounder 
 Southern fish species becoming more abundant in larvae surveys:
 Gray snapper
 Pinfish
 Gag grouper
 Black drum
 Crested blenny
 Feather blenny
 Green goby
 *Economically important species
 SOURCE: Ken Able
 Contact Sandy Bauers at 215-854-5147, sbauers@ phillynews.com, or follow on Twitter @sbauers. Read her blog at www.inquirer.com/greenspace
Correction


Photo captions Sunday with a story on changes confronting New Jersey fishermen wrongly named the Rider University fisheries intern pictured above, Pilar Ferdinando.
Correction-Date: September 24, 2013


Load-Date: September 22, 2013


End of Documen
t



As climate changes, health dangers increase
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 15, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: HEALTH; Pg. G1
Length: 1438 words
Byline: Tom Avril STAFF WRITER
Body


The day they found Lee Odgers, it was so hot that the wax candles inside her Northeast Philadelphia apartment had started to melt.
The 87-year-old woman had been dead for hours, too long for investigators to get an accurate reading of her body temperature at the time of her death. They could not list hyperthermia - an abnormally high temperature - as the cause of death.
Yet the city was in the grip of an 11-day stretch with temperatures in the 90s that month, July 1993, and Odgers lived alone on the second floor of a red-brick rowhouse - a staple of the Philadelphia streetscape that retains heat with dangerous efficiency. She had no air conditioning and her windows were closed.
Then-medical examiner Haresh Mirchandani decided that a broader recognition of heat's deadly impact was in order. The deaths of Odgers and 100 others that month would be classified as "heat-related."
Call him a prophet for the climate change era.
Philadelphia ramped up its heat-emergency response program that summer, extending hours for air-conditioned public facilities and swimming pools, assigning block captains to check on older, vulnerable residents, even asking utility companies to delay shutoffs for unpaid accounts. The city has prevented an average of 45 heat-related deaths a year since then, Brown University researchers estimated in a 2018 study.
But with the continued rise in temperatures, the challenge becomes more daunting by the year.
Between 1950 and 1999, the city saw an average of three days a year when temperatures exceeded 95 degrees. By the end of this century, temperatures could cross that sweltering threshold on 17 to 52 days a year, according to a 2015 report from the Mayor's Office of Sustainability, using models from the World Climate Research Programme. The wide range in that projection depends on how much governments rein in emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping greenhouse gases.
For those whose health already is compromised - such as the old and frail who lack air conditioning, and people with heart or kidney disease - physicians say this hotter future will be dangerous.
Extreme heat can kill in a variety of ways. Older people's blood vessels are less able to dilate in order to dissipate heat, adding strain on the heart. They also are more prone to dehydration and loss of vital electrolytes, raising the risk of kidney failure and irregular heartbeat - especially for those whose organs already are compromised. People with weaker lungs struggle to breathe, as heat contributes to the formation of ground-level ozone, the main component of smog.
"You get this kind of multi-factorial bomb that's going off," said Gregory McDonald, dean of the school of health sciences at the Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine.
And in some cases, as happened dozens of times in July 1993, the immediate cause is not apparent.
'So many bodies'
Carlos Fonseca had just started a fellowship with the Philadelphia Medical Examiner's Office - his final year of training as a forensic pathologist - and his first weekend shift at the morgue came that July.
A typical day meant five or 10 bodies, often younger victims of drug overdoses, gunshots, and car accidents. But when he came in that Saturday, the death toll was in the dozens and the victims were disproportionately old and frail.
"The refrigerator was full," he recalled. "There were so many bodies. I was like, 'What's going on?' "
Colleagues were summoned to handle the overflow. The next day, there were dozens more bodies, said Fonseca, now deputy medical examiner in Morris County, N.J.
By the end of the heat wave, medical examiners would identify 17 victims who met the formal definition of hyperthermia, having a core temperature above 105 degrees. But dozens of others were found too late for that measurement, in some cases more than a day after they died.
Odgers, the 87-year-old who had the windows closed in her Northeast Philadelphia apartment, was typical. She lived alone and had declined offers of help.
"I offered to get her an air conditioner, but she refused," a relative said at the time. "She was a very independent-type person."
Medical examiner Mirchandani and his colleagues, with the support of then-Health Commissioner Robert K. Ross, came up with a set of criteria for such cases:
If a victim was frail and elderly, or even was younger and suffering from a chronic illness, and was found in a hot environment, the death would be classified as heat-related. In addition to the 17 formal cases of hyperthermia, the office determined that the extreme heat had contributed to 101 more deaths, bringing the toll to
118.
Initially viewed as alarmist by some, that definition soon became accepted by the research community, recalled McDonald, the medical school dean, who worked for Mirchandani at the time.
"That was definitely a game changer," he said.
Two years later, when the frail and elderly died in disproportionate numbers during a severe Chicago heat wave, officials there took the same tack: More than 450 deaths were classified as heat-related.
Unequal impact
The effects of climate change are felt unequally around the world, with developing nations so far bearing the brunt of health consequence. Yet even in a big U.S. city such as Philadelphia, disparities also are clear.
In Philadelphia during a heat wave, temperatures in poorer, pavement-dense neighborhoods can be as much as 20 degrees higher than in leafier parts of the city, researchers have found. And residents of the hotter areas may be less equipped to cope, lacking air conditioning or money to power it.
In a first step toward addressing the imbalance, representatives from the Mayor's Office of Sustainability surveyed residents last year in Hunting Park, a lower-income section of the city that tends to be hit hard by the heat.
The neighborhood is not near any of the 12 air-conditioned library branches that are kept open late during heat health emergencies. So the sustainability office asked leaders of churches and mosques in the area if they could remain open as an informal alternative, and some were receptive, director Christine Knapp said. Other proposals include working with community groups to plant more trees, even adding bus shelters to shield people from the sun.
The need is urgent, Knapp said: "How can we start preparing some of our communities to understand what that heat is going to feel like, and how to make them more resilient?"
When the Department of Public Health declares a heat emergency, the Philadelphia Corporation for Aging also takes emergency calls until midnight. In cases of dire need, a nurse is dispatched to the person's home.
The world at large also can do its part by limiting emissions, health experts say. Average global temperatures already have increased by nearly 2 degrees Fahrenheit since preindustrial times. The extent to which future warming can be limited will have a direct impact on human health, University of Bristol researchers found in a June study. If the increase is kept within one more degree, Philadelphia and 14 other U.S. cities would save hundreds of lives a year, compared with the death toll if average temperatures increased by 3 more degrees, the authors found.
Medicine and climate
In the more immediate future, the field of medicine is exploring ways to help the vulnerable cope. Medical schools have started to add units on climate medicine. And physicians are pondering how medications might need to be tweaked during a heat wave.
Patients with heart failure, for example, commonly take diuretics to eliminate excess bodily fluid and reduce the strain on their weakened hearts. But along with excreting the water, patients lose potassium - an essential element for heart muscle function.
The risk is especially pronounced in hot weather, said Sean Hennessy, a professor of epidemiology at the University of Pennsylvania's Perelman School of Medicine. In a study earlier this year, he and colleagues found that patients who take diuretics were more likely to survive hot temperatures if they also took potassium supplements.
Research on those with other chronic illnesses is increasingly needed, Hennessy said.
"People with heart failure, the frail elderly, people who don't have access to air conditioning, they're all vulnerable," he said. "Something that you and I would bounce back from easily, that same thing could put them in a lot more trouble."
Because if the projections are correct, it is not a question of whether the northeastern U.S. will see another heat wave like the one that killed 118 Philadelphians in 1993.
It's a question of when. tavril@inquirer.com
215-854-2430
TomAvril1

Load-Date: September 15, 2019


End of Documen
t



Study: GOP generational change on climate views
The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 26, 2019 Tuesday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A3
Length: 556 words
Byline: Frank Kummer STAFF WRITER
Body


There's a generational divide between older and younger Republicans when it comes to climate change, but overall, most Americans agree that the science - and the problem - are real, according to a national Pew survey released Monday.
Almost two-thirds of Americans say the federal government isn't doing enough to address climate change and want it to focus on developing renewable energy sources, according to Pew. That might not be surprising, since polls have been trending that way for years.
But digging deeper into the October survey of more than 3,627 nationally representative panelists shows an age divide between millennials and Generation Z Republicans and their Generation X and Baby Boomer counterparts.
About 52% of Republicans between ages 18 and 38 say the government is doing too little on climate. Meanwhile, 41% of their elders hold the same belief.
There's also a gender divide, with more Republican women than men saying the government is not doing enough.
Those divisions persist on protecting water and air quality, with younger people and women within the party more supportive of regulatory efforts. The report comes at a time when the Trump administration and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency are aggressively seeking to roll back protections put in place during the Obama administration.
Cari Funk, director of science and society research at Pew, was cautious about drawing conclusions on long-term trends, but said the findings are similar to those found last year. Pew has migrated away from telephone interviews to an internet-based survey. So it is not comparing results of survey years prior to 2018.
"We noticed this difference about a year ago," Funk said of a generational split.
Funk noted Democrats are consistent in an overwhelming belief in climate change, that it's caused by humans, and that the government isn't doing enough. That belief is consistent among all ages and both genders.
It's only within the GOP that the split occurs. "It's not brandnew, but it's certainly a more recent phenomenon," Funk said.
Funk emphasized that beliefs of younger Republicans, however, don't align with their Democratic age cohorts. "We don't want to overstate the differences," Funk said. "Millennials and Gen Z Republicans don't look like Democrats on these issues, but they don't look like the older generation [of Republicans] either."
For example, Democrats tend to believe that climate policies do more good than harm for the environment. But Millennial and Gen Z Republicans are still skeptical about government. Only 40% believe climate policies do more good than harm.
The cause of climate change continues to be a partisan issue. Older Republicans in particular attribute the problem to natural, not man-made, causes.
Overall, about half of Americans say human activity contributes a "great deal" to climate change.
But more than eight in 10 Democrats attribute climate change to human activity, compared with fewer than four in 10 Republicans blaming people for the crisis.
Renewable energy sources also reflect a GOP divide, with younger people less in favor of offshore drilling for oil and natural gas than older Republicans. And, they are less likely to support hydraulic fracturing.
"You're seeing a majority of millennials and Gen Z saying, we should prioritize renewable energy sources," Funk said.

Load-Date: November 26, 2019


End of Documen
t



Campuses focus on climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 31, 2008 Thursday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: PHILADELPHIA; Inq Education; Pg. B01
Length: 1154 words
Byline: By Kathy Boccella

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


For years, biology professor Anne Bower tried to convince her students at Philadelphia University that global climate change was real and that it was damaging the planet at an alarming rate. 
" 'That's just a theory. Who cares?' " the students would reply to Bower, who teaches environmental studies. 
But the naysayers are no more. Global warming "is resonating with students," and they want to know what they can do to help, Bower said. 
They will get a chance to find out this week as colleges across the country take part in Focus the Nation, a grassroots effort that brings together teachers, students, scientists and legislators to come up with solutions to what many consider the defining challenge of the 21st century. 
More than 1,500 colleges, schools and community groups have signed up, including about a dozen local institutions, with activities, symposiums and discussions culminating in a nationwide "teach-in" today. 
The yearlong event was the creation of Eban Goodstein, an economics professor at Lewis and Clark College in Portland, Ore., and a longtime environmental activist, and his wife, Chungin Chung, a civil-rights organizer. Major funding comes from Nike, Clif Bar and Stonyfield Farms, as well as other companies and foundations. 
Goodstein, an author of several environmental books, ran the Green House Network, which trained people to educate their communities about climate change. A sense of urgency and concern for his children's future stirred him to organize a nationwide event centered on college students. 
"They get that global warming is bad and is real," Goodstein said, taking a short break from the frenzy of activity leading up to the big event. "But they don't realize how short the window for action is if we're going to have a substantive impact. I have an 18-year-old daughter, and this is really her future we're talking about." 
Students want concrete solutions, which is one reason Focus the Nation was timed to coincide with the presidential campaign, and schools are encouraged to invite legislators to their events, he said. 
"Many, many people on campuses are sick of hearing that the world is coming to an end. They want to hear about solutions, and they want to hear from their political leaders," Goodstein said. 
College students are taking up climate change as their generation's social movement with the hope of averting a potential catastrophe. 
"Many people my age don't even really think about the war in Iraq because it's not happening here," said Victoria Bisbing, a senior who has helped plan a four-day event at Ursinus College in Collegeville. "But the environment is all around us, so they are more concerned with that." 
Many schools are working to limit their dependence on energy sources that emit greenhouse gases. Swarthmore College plans to meet 35 percent of its total energy needs from wind-power sources. The University of Pennsylvania has joined more than 100 colleges in RecyleMania, a competition to reduce waste. 
Other universities are designing new buildings and updating older ones to be more energy-efficient, with water-saving mechanisms, solar panels, and plant-covered walls and rooftops. And more than 130 colleges have pledged to achieve "climate neutrality" on their campuses. 
Ursinus will host one of the biggest events in the state, featuring four legislators, climate-change researcher Richard Alley, Joe Kruger of the National Commission on Energy Policy, and other energy environmental experts through Saturday.  
Also scheduled are a show by an environmental artist and activist and a concert by folk-pop singer Dar Williams. Ursinus students have worked with Methacton High School in Norristown to draft environmental legislation to present to policy makers, and with Royersford Elementary School's climate-change club. 
Leah Joseph, an environmental-studies professor who is cochairing the event, said the college was the first in the state to sign up after she attended a meeting with Goodstein 18 months ago. 
"It wasn't just another conference about climate change. It was a way to start making a change," she said. "We can do this and make a fundamental difference in an issue that is becoming critical." 
At the other end of the spectrum, West Chester University joined Focus the Nation two weeks ago but has a week full of events, said Jeanne Peters, a secretary in the geography department who is helping to plan the activities. 
While the school has done a lot to become "greener," she said, she wishes students were more concerned about issue. 
"They're inheriting this problem. It's going to be here forever. The time for dissent is over. The world agrees that it's a problem and we have to do something about it," she said. 
Rowan University announced this week that it was moving to single-stream recycling, which allows various recyclables to go in one bin, and would have teachers and students talking about global warming all day today. 
"Those students are going to go out and influence other people, including their parents," said Jess Everett, an environmental engineer who is in charge of planning. 
Elaine Grose, an environmental professor at Neumann College, said she always shows her students the movie An Inconvenient Truth, and the reaction is usually the same. 
"It's like, 'I didn't know that,' " said Grose, whose school will host speakers and a weeklong teach-in. 
For Goodstein and his fellow activists, the time for debate is over. Global warming has reached a critical juncture, he said.  
"Nobody would say that human-induced global warming is not real," he said, then corrected himself. Some people may still be dubious, he added, but they have "no basis on which to contradict the overwhelming consensus of the scientific community." 
Goodstein, who recently wrote a book on global warming titled Fighting for Love in the Century of Extinction, is a veteran of two previous climate-change movements: Step It Up, a national movement to stop global warming launched last April, and Campus Climate Challenge, which encourages high school and college students to propose clean-energy policies at their schools. He says he would like to see Focus the Nation bring together various global-warming efforts. 
Even Al Gore, who won a Nobel Prize for his environmental activism, has not mobilized the next generation the way Goodstein hopes Focus the Nation will. 
"Al Gore has obviously been an amazing leader, but he has not been able to build a grassroots movement from the bottom up. And he ultimately can't provide the solution. That has to come from an engaged and mobilized citizenry," he said. 
"This is the greatest generation," he said of today's college students. "If you look at the work they're going to have to do, they'll have to rewire the entire planet with clean-energy technology. As educators, we need to get them ready to do that." 
Contact staff writer Kathy Boccella at 610-313-8123 or kboccella@phillynews.com. 

Graphic

 
Photograph by: Feed Loader

Load-Date: January 31, 2008


End of Documen
t



Fracking at center of Democratic split; A U.S. Steel plan to lease land for gas extraction highlights the debate of jobs vs. climate change and the environment.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 29, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: THE REGION; Pg. B1
Length: 2745 words
Byline: Andrew Seidman STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
A U.S. Steel plan to lease land for gas extraction highlights the debate of jobs vs. climate change and the environment.
BRADDOCK, Pa. - About a year ago, Chardaé Jones finally had enough money to pay off some student loans and move out of her parents' house into a third-floor apartment across the street from a steel mill that helped build America.
When Jones, 31, looked out her window at night at the mill Andrew Carnegie built 145 years ago, she wrote down what she saw and heard:
The wailing whistles and vicious vibrations coming from the steel mill sometimes sounds like the sky is crying especially since the smoke is always bellowing out almost as if it was the Earth begging for a break
Jones grew up in Braddock, a town of 2,114 people about 11 miles southeast of Pittsburgh on the Monongahela River, and last year became mayor. She was used to the pollution. What she found more troubling was U.S. Steel's plan, in the works now for more than two years, to lease 10 acres to a New Mexico-based oil and gas company to extract natural gas a mile beneath the surface using a controversial drilling technique known as fracking.
"A lot of this area is in a flood zone," she said. "We're near a river. It just seems like a recipe for disaster."
As word spread, others grew suspicious of what the proposal might mean for public health. Some of them got elected to local and state office. And in January, a neighboring town revoked the gas company's permit to build part of a well site on its land.
Opponents hope that might kill the proposal altogether - something that one prominent local Democratic politician, Lt. Gov. John Fetterman, warns could cause U.S. Steel to shut down the mill and force mass layoffs, even as the company promises to invest more than $1 billion into the mill and another Pittsburgh-area facility to make them more energy efficient. The company says the on-site natural gas source would significantly reduce its costs at a moment when the steel industry has faced new struggles.
More than a decade into a natural gas boom that has driven down energy costs for consumers and literally reshaped the landscape with thousands of wells and pipelines carrying gas across the state, this pocket of Southwestern Pennsylvania is facing a reckoning over the issue. It comes as one of the leading contenders for the Democratic presidential nomination, Sen. Bernie Sanders, has proposed a federal ban on hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, a technique for unlocking natural gas from rock formations like the Marcellus Shale with high-pressure injections of water, chemicals, and sand.
Former Vice President Joe Biden, the Democratic front-runner, has resisted a ban but called for no more drilling on federal land. "We've got to take on the fossil-fuel industry," Sanders chided Biden during their most recent debate. "Your plan doesn't do that."
Some Democrats warn that a fracking ban would clear the way for President Donald Trump to again win the critical electoral battleground of Pennsylvania.
The debate over fracking has "turned into this binary choice: Either you're profracking and you're evil and you want the world to burn, or you're against it and like virtue-signaling," said Fetterman, who once campaigned as a fracking opponent but supports the proposed drilling here and warns its defeat would jeopardize 3,000 "family sustaining union jobs."
"The truth is messy," he said, speaking in his living room, where steam rising from the mill was visible through the window. "The biggest collision of those two [positions] in American politics is right here in Pennsylvania. It's happening across the street there. And it's happening anywhere else where you have a fringe of our party claiming you can walk away from all of this, and then at the same time lamenting: 'Where did all the jobs go? Where did all the union jobs go?' Or you wonder, 'Why are they voting for that crazy man in the red hat?' Because he's not trying to run my job out of existence."
As with much else in American life, tribalism and mistrust exacerbate tensions, especially when the stakes seem so high. Jobs might be at risk. If climate change is an urgent threat, the fracking opponents wonder what it says if their elected officials won't take a stand in their own backyard.
"We can't even have a conversation about the health impacts without you being accused of hating jobs," said State Rep. Summer Lee, whose district includes Braddock. "That's disingenuous. ... While these towns, while these people, while these workers who are in the midst of it may not be able to afford to think more long term, your politician is supposed to."
Shale-industry jobs in Pennsylvania jumped from 9,143 in 2007 to 20,146 in 2016, an increase of 120%, according to a 2018 analysis by the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics. That doesn't include jobs indirectly linked to drilling. However, a glut of natural gas has driven down prices and slowed production. Chevron said last month it was getting out of the Appalachian basin and would eliminate 320 jobs in Pennsylvania.
The politics of fracking and energy policy in a state that sits on the second-biggest natural gas reserves in the country is more nuanced than absolutist positions might indicate. Last year in historically Republican Chester County, for example, Democrats took the courthouse for the first time ever, in part because of public anger over the Mariner East pipeline, which carries natural gas from Southwest Pennsylvania.
In Harrisburg, Democratic Gov. Tom Wolf's biggest second-term initiative - a $4.5 billion infrastructure plan that would borrow money against future tax revenues on natural gas drillers - is facing opposition from progressives who say it underwrites the state's future on fossil fuels. The GOP-controlled legislature has long opposed a severance tax on drilling. The industry is one of the most powerful interest groups in state politics, having spent tens of millions of dollars on lobbying and campaign contributions.
And in Philadelphia, the sale of Philadelphia Energy Solutions' bankrupt and shuttered oil refinery divided building trades unions and workers against progressive Democrats and climate activists.
Perhaps nowhere is the intraparty divide more pronounced than here in Allegheny County, where the Democratic mayor of Pittsburgh ignited a storm of controversy late last year by opposing "any additional petrochemical companies coming to Western Pennsylvania."
And the fight in Braddock is laced with tensions over racial and social justice, as some in the minority communities surrounding the proposed well say they have missed out on Big Industry's supposed economic benefits even as they have endured its health hazards.
It also shows how the grassroots energy on the left activated across the country by Donald Trump's election sometimes results in conflict with old-guard party structures.
All of this is unfolding as Trump campaigns for reelection declaring he has "ended the war on American energy," as he put it in a speech in Pittsburgh last fall. In 2016, Trump told Pennsylvania workers he would unleash an energy revolution and bring back coal jobs. He hasn't revived coal. And however improbable some of his promises may have been, they are central to his message that he stands with the white working-class voters who helped elect him.
Pennsylvania voters are split on a fracking ban, with a narrow plurality (42%) opposing it, according to a February Muhlenberg College/Morning Call poll.
Fetterman, in the interview, motioned toward the steel mill and its two blast furnaces. "Look over there," he said. "You think you can power that off solar panels? It's time to get real."
A legacy of racial tension
In the steel industry's heyday during the first half of the 20th century, Braddock was booming: 20,000 people lived in the 0.6 square-mile town, and the downtown on Braddock Avenue was filled with movie theaters and department stores. Vestiges of that time frame a wall in Summer Lee's Braddock Avenue office. There are other signs of the borough's decline: pictures of the 2010 demolition of a hospital down the street, a closing that resulted in the loss of hundreds of jobs, and baby pacifiers found in the rubble.
Lee, 32, took an interest in local politics in 2017. She'd recently worked on Hillary Clinton's campaign in Pennsylvania. After the election, her high school alma mater was in the news. The principal, who was white, allegedly threatened to assault a 14-year-old black student. A few months later, a school resource officer was accused of knocking another student's tooth out. The school district would later settle those and other claims in federal court.
The Woodland Hills School District was created in the 1980s when a federal judge ordered the integration of racially segregated school districts in the Braddock area. The new district remained under court supervision until 2003 - when Lee was still in high school there.
She helped organize a successful campaign for school board, then decided to run herself in 2018, for the state House against a longtime incumbent. She planned to center her campaign around education. Then Lee, who grew up in North Braddock and now lives in nearby Swissvale, learned about the fracking proposal at U.S. Steel's Edgar Thomson Works mill. "It was like the one thing that galvanized people," she said.
"We already have among the worst air quality in the nation," Lee added, speaking before the coronavirus outbreak hit Pennsylvania. "We already have disproportionately high asthma and cancer and respiratory illness rates. We already have blight. We already have poor infrastructure."
The shale gas boom may have contributed $21 billion to the economy in Pennsylvania, Ohio, and West Virginia between 2004 and 2016, researchers at Carnegie Mellon University found. But most of those benefits flowed to rural areas, and the researchers also linked drilling to as many as 4,600 premature deaths associated with air pollution, and billions of dollars' worth of environmental costs concentrated in urban areas.
"When the fracking proposal came, everybody was like, 'That's one more thing that's going to harm us,' " Lee said.
U.S. Steel says the well would enhance the long-term competitiveness of its Pittsburgh-area facilities. The driller, Merrion Oil & Gas, says it would comply with state environmental regulations and hire local contractors to ensure "the safe and proper execution of the project while taking all steps necessary to be good environmental stewards."
Lee defeated a 20-year incumbent with 68% of the vote in the 2018 Democratic primary. She became the first black woman ever to represent Southwestern Pennsylvania in the legislature.
The same year, Fetterman, who'd served as mayor of Braddock since 2006, was elected lieutenant governor.
A shooting emboldens an activist
While Lee was waging her primary campaign, another political newcomer was mobilizing.
Jonathan Reyes, now 32, had been living in public housing his whole life, most recently in McKeesport. He not only was used to hearing gunshots every day, he knew firsthand how devastating they could be: In 2009, Reyes was eating pizza with a friend when, he says, a gun he carried for protection accidentally went off, killing his friend.
Reyes ultimately pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor involuntary-manslaughter charge.
A decade later, he had become active in antiviolence initiatives and was married with five kids.
"I didn't want to live in a community where it's no longer a shock when somebody gets shot," said Reyes, who works at the Braddock Carnegie Library.
Reyes did some research and decided East Pittsburgh would be safer. He bought a house there in March 2018.
But on June 19, 2018, a white East Pittsburgh police officer shot and killed Antwon Rose II, an unarmed black teenager who had fled the scene of a traffic stop. Officer Michael Rosfeld was acquitted of homicide charges last year.
A bystander captured the shooting on video, bringing national attention.
Reyes, who later learned that Rose had taught his niece gymnastics, marched in protests.
Around the time of the shooting, Reyes also learned about the fracking proposal at U.S. Steel's facility. The unconventional well site would span parts of three municipalities: North Versailles, East Pittsburgh, and North Braddock.
Reyes started knocking on neighbors' doors and found that no one knew about the plan. He decided to run for the local council.
Reyes connected with other grassroots activists. By the time the group North Braddock Residents for Our Future caught wind of the new proposal, the towns of North Versailles and East Pittsburgh - persuaded by a new revenue opportunity - had already voted to approve permits for Merrion Oil & Gas. Merrion still needed permits from the state.
Activists, frustrated by what they described as a lack of transparency, held meetings, educated the public, and pressed for more information. Their prodding led to a March 2019 meeting held by the state DEP, U.S. Steel, and Merrion.
Officials explained to hundreds of residents that Merrion wanted to drill a well 6,700 feet underground and extend it laterally 10,000 feet, or almost two miles, into the Marcellus Shale formation.
Residents expressed concern that the proposed well was near a densely populated area and a flood-prone river. New Mexico-based Merrion had never drilled an unconventional well, and had never drilled any kind of well in Pennsylvania.
Merrion says it has operated hundreds of wells over 60 years and would hire local consultants and contractors that have "a tremendous amount of experience and expertise in drilling unconventional horizontal wells in Southwest Pennsylvania."
In Braddock and East Pittsburgh, the population is predominantly black, and more than 30% live below the poverty line - more than double the state average.
In November, Reyes and another antifracking candidate were elected to the East Pittsburgh Council. When they took office in January, the council voted to revoke Merrion's permit - issued in December 2017 - declaring it had expired.
Merrion is appealing the decision to the East Pittsburgh zoning board. A hearing is set for March 31.
In an email, Merrion operations manager Ryan Davis said the company is moving forward with its plan to drill.
Davis said drilling near a floodplain "is common and proven to be safe in practice when state regulations have been complied with, and we will be in compliance."
A spokesperson for the state Department of Environmental Protection said Merrion's permit applications remained under review.
'I see where you're coming from'
The fight isn't over. Lee is facing a primary challenge from a North Braddock councilman who supports the fracking proposal and says he's running "to support Gov. Tom Wolf's progressive agenda."
Last month, the Allegheny County Democratic Party and the Allegheny-Fayette Central Labor Council endorsed the challenger, Chris Roland. Building trades unions have supported pro-fracking candidates, citing construction jobs associated with big projects like a Shell petrochemical plant being built 25 miles northwest of Pittsburgh.
"The fear was... that if that fracking didn't come, they were proposing to shut down the mills," Lee said. "I think that's disingenuous. I don't think U.S. Steel is going to do that."
A spokesperson for U.S. Steel said that beyond reaffirming the company's commitment to the region, it "would not be appropriate for us to respond further to speculation about natural gas exploration plans that have not been approved or finalized."
Yet there are signs of hope for collaboration. Just the other day, Mayor Jones of Braddock, the one who wrote the poem about the steel mill, met with a steelworker at a taco place on Braddock Avenue. Steelworkers Local 1219, which represents hundreds of workers at the Edgar Thomson mill, is creating an environmental committee and wants to inform the community about what's going on at the mill, he told her. (The union's president didn't return messages seeking comment.)
Jones explained her concerns about fracking to the steelworker. "He was like, 'Yeah, I see where you're coming from,' " she said. "He was a nice guy."
"I understand why some of the steelworkers get upset, or get antsy, when people say things like fracking is bad," Jones said. "A lot of the steelworkers have been there so long. ... That is their career. You don't want anyone to jeopardize your career." aseidman@inquirer.com
215-854-4542 AndrewSeidman

Load-Date: March 29, 2020


End of Documen
t



Phila. can learn from Pittsburgh on climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
December 1, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. C4
Length: 760 words
Byline: WILL BUNCH
Body


Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto managed to shake up his Steel City recently when he uttered just 10 words.
"I oppose any additional petrochemical companies coming to Western Pennsylvania," Peduto told a recent conference attended largely by environmentalists. The leader of Pennsylvania's second-largest city said it makes no sense for Western Pennsylvania to "invest in 19th-century industry that costs us the opportunity to bring 21st-century industry to this region."
Peduto has committed staff and planning resources to stave off climate change, only to see Shell Oil constructing a $6 billion ethane cracker in neighboring Beaver County that - despite supposed state-of-the-art pollution control - will emit 2.25 million tons of carbon dioxide every year and, thus, wipe out all of the carbon reductions that Pittsburgh had planned through 2030. The Shell plant - hailed as a job creator (up to 6,000 construction, 500 permanent) by politicians including President Donald Trump and Gov. Tom Wolf - may be just the tip of a petrochemical iceberg in the Ohio Valley, with Big Oil icon ExxonMobil looking for a nearby site and several more proposed plants to make plastics from fracked gas on the drawing boards.
This is happening as a U.N. panel warned that the fight to prevent the worst effects of global warming has grown more desperate, in part because big nations like the United States and China have actually seen greenhouse-gas pollution increase at a time when shrinking it is required. The U.N.'s environmental chief said bluntly that humankind needs "to catch up on the years in which we procrastinated."
That's a great lesson for Philadelphia, which has definitely procrastinated on fossil fuels. On Tuesday, city officials released a report from a task force studying the future of the Philadelphia Energy Solutions' refinery, which closed after a fire in June and is now before federal bankruptcy court. The report outlined the city's aspirations to make the site as "green" as possible under presumably new owners - while still providing jobs, of course - and less likely to cause an environmental disaster. But with the sprawling facility in private hands, and with bankruptcy court tasked solely with getting the most bang for the buck, Philadelphia's hands are mostly tied.
But one of the city's leading environmental groups, the Clean Air Council, recently partnered with Drexel University's Lindy Institute for Urban Innovation to launch a study of longterm uses for the South Philly site that could make use of its prime real estate in some greener way than continued oil refining. The council's executive director, Joe Minott, told me he fears that by "hanging on for dear life to fossil fuels, we'll miss an opportunity."
Critically, there's a growing consensus among environmentalists like Minott and city officials that Philadelphia - which asked for and was given a seat at the refinery bankruptcy hearings - can influence that future by making it clear that pending governmental actions will favor green facilities, not polluting ones. That includes things like tougher air-monitoring rules, proposed restrictions that prevent any new owner from using hydrofluoric acid - the lethal chemical that nearly caused a major catastrophe in June - and the city's considerable influence over matters around zoning and infrastructure.
The Kenney administration should work with City Council to do all of the things, but we - and frankly, the mayor in particular - can do so much more. I'd love to see Jim Kenney one-up Bill Peduto and make some even bolder declarations - that the fossil-fuel era in Philadelphia is officially over, that America's founding city plans to be its greenest city by the 250th birthday bash, and also forget about 2050 goals because we're going to do bold stuff that will make your head spin ... this year! Philadelphia would never allow Pittsburgh to rough us up inside a hockey rink, so let's show the state's No. 2 city who's the boss in the arena of climate.
This month's climate tip: So I promised a climate-change column every month in 2019 and - human nature being what it is - I'm cheating a little at the end, as this piece launched online in November even though it's scheduled for print Dec. 1. Speaking of December, no holiday offers more opportunity to do little things to save the planet than the winter holiday season. Such as ... turkey over beef, smaller cuts, local sources, with recyclable or even reusable wrapping paper and LED outdoor light displays on a timer. wbunch@inquirer.com
215-854-2957 will_bunch

Load-Date: December 1, 2019


End of Documen
t



Climate-change activist to speak at West Chester University
The Philadelphia Inquirer
April 9, 2014 Wednesday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2014 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Inq World & Nation; Pg. A03
Length: 846 words
Byline: By Sandy Bauers

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


'Dear Sophie . . ."
 The man who is arguably the nation's best-known climate-change scientist was writing to his granddaughter.
 The letter was about monarch butterflies and a bullfrog, to be followed by others sounding environmental themes. James E. Hansen - "Bopa" to Sophie - wanted to teach her "how science works, how we investigate cause and effect," he said recently.
 Explaining it to her - in letters he plans to turn into a book called Sophie's Planet - "will help me put the climate story in a language that a broader audience can understand."
 So far, Hansen fears, he has not done an adequate job of that. Nations still are emitting dangerous volumes of heat-trapping gases. The carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere continues to increase.
 Hansen sees a crime against future generations, and so he keeps speaking out.
 He will be the keynote lecturer Thursday at West Chester University's Research Day, an annual event highlighting projects ranging through the sciences and the arts.
 Hansen, 73, brought a broader awareness to climate change with his congressional testimony in the 1980s. In 2006, Time named him one of the world's 100 most influential people.
 As time has passed - and those who deny human-induced climate change have continued their criticism - his advocacy has grown more staunch. He has been arrested five times during protests over mountaintop coal mining and the Keystone XL pipeline, which he called "a big spigot that will hitch our country to one of the dirtiest fuels on Earth for 40 years or more."
 A year ago, Hansen retired as director of the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies, in part to step up his activism and pursue legal action to limit greenhouse gas pollution.
 "The one thing different is that I can now testify in court against the government," said Hansen, now an adjunct professor of earth and environmental sciences at Columbia University's Earth Institute. He lives on a farm in Kintnersville, in upper Bucks County.
 He's been called an alarmist. Unrealistic. Flat-out wrong. And worse.
 The emotional cost "only makes me feel more determined," he said.
 Praise abounds, too. Environmental activist Robert F. Kennedy Jr. pronounced him "a modern-day hero." Former Vice President Al Gore said Hansen will be seen as "the scientist with the most powerful and consistent voice calling for intelligent action to preserve our planet's environment."
 While some have said they wish Hansen would stick to science and leave policy to the policymakers, Pennsylvania State University climate-change researcher Michael Mann said he sees "no problem in scientists' views on matters of policy being informed by their understanding of the science. . . . I think we would be derelict in our duty, as a community, if we were unwilling to speak to the implications of the science and the risks of inaction."
 Hansen sees no vindication in the succession of reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. In March, it released its most dire prediction yet, saying that without reductions in emissions of heat-trapping gases, the deleterious effects could spiral out of control.
 "I have not looked" at the report, Hansen said. "By their nature, they are very conservative, so their conclusions tend to be a decade or so behind."
 In March, he testified about climate and energy before the U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. "The exact limit is debatable," he told the lawmakers, "but there is no scientific debate about the fact that we cannot burn all of the fossil fuels without unacceptable destruction of life and property."
 Nevertheless, "the situation does not call for hand-wringing and despair," he said. "We have the potential to meet the challenge."
 Hansen does see positive change. He said he is encouraged by the growth of the Citizens Climate Lobby, whose members write op-eds, visit legislators, and otherwise try to persuade the government to tax fossil fuel companies and distribute the money equally to households - in effect, rewarding those who consume less energy.
 "This rising carbon fee will spur innovations in carbon-free energy and energy efficiency, and it will allow the market to make decisions," he said. "Not one dime to make the government bigger."
 Hansen is hard on himself as not making a convincing-enough pitch for action on climate change.
 Last summer, while he gave an informal talk at a friend's house, his wife noticed tears streaming down a child's face. Don't worry, she said, grown-ups are working to solve the problem.
 That statement "is gut-wrenching," Hansen later wrote to Sophie, now 15. "It gnaws on me because I am one of the adults who should have been fixing the problem."
 If You Go 
 James E. Hansen's talk, "Tenant Farming the White House Arrests: A Scientific Perspective on the Unfolding Climate Crisis," begins at 7:30 p.m. Thursday in the Emilie Asplundh Concert Hall, South High Street, West Chester. Tickets are $5, available at the door, by phone at 610-436-2266, or at http://tickets.wcupa.edu/
sbauers@phillynews.com
  215-854-5147 @sbauers
www.inquirer.com/greenspace

Graphic

 
Reuters

Load-Date: April 9, 2014


End of Documen
t



Commentary: Citizens should push lawmakers on climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 6, 2017 Monday, WEB Edition


Copyright 2017 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: WEB; P-com Opinion; Pg. 00
Length: 618 words
Byline: By Wayne Madsen
Body


Although the Trump administration believes man-made climate change is a hoax invented by the Chinese, the Senate and House of Representatives should not abrogate their responsibility to maintain America's commitment to halting the steady melting of polar ice caps and the rising of sea levels.
These catastrophes are caused by greenhouse gases being belched into the atmosphere.
With a single stroke of a pen, President Trump signed an executive order slashing environmental regulations, an act that may run afoul of environmental laws enacted by presidents from Richard Nixon to Barack Obama.
Congress should act promptly to ensure that Trump does not unconstitutionally violate by executive fiat federal environmental laws intended to protect the atmosphere and our precious water resources.
Trump's order requires that for every new regulation, including those that protect the environment, two others must be eliminated.
This decision represents an absurd attack on the protections now afforded to our environment from the ravages brought about by human-caused climate change.
Only a few days into his administration, Trump told the CEOs of Ford, General Motors. and Fiat Chrysler that he believed current environmental regulations were "out of control."
In the same breath, Trump said, "I am, to a large extent, an environmentalist." Trump declaring that he is an environmentalist in a meeting with three top automotive industry executives is like the president avowing his support for healthy foods to the top executives of America's three largest candy companies.
Scrapping environmental regulations will do nothing to curb rising sea levels, disappearing shorelines, and increasingly erratic weather conditions.
Congress should immediately correct the sharp deviation of U.S. environmental policy by taking decisive steps to maintain the country's commitment to clean energy.
The Trump administration and its Republican and a few Democratic supporters in Congress are falling under the spell of "inexhaustible" tar sands oil via the Keystone XL and Dakota Access pipelines and "clean coal," an environmental oxymoron if there ever was one.
Congress should guarantee that the Trump administration does not pull out of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change - also known as the Paris Accord.
This can be done by passing legislation, immune to a Trump veto, that would keep the United States bound to the Paris agreement's targeted decreases in carbon dioxide emission levels.
In this regard, Congress should seek the assistance of the nation's new secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, ironically, a backer of the Paris accord even though, until recently, he was the CEO of Exxon Mobil.
Congressional Republicans are vulnerable in this area, and could be swayed by political pressure from the voters.
For example, since 2012, the Midwest breadbasket has experienced its worst drought in a hundred years. The farmers of Kansas, Nebraska, North and South Dakota, Missouri, Oklahoma, northern Texas, Iowa, and other drought-plagued states and regions can and should apply painful pressure on their congressional representatives to shape up on climate change or face being shipped out of office.
When Nixon pushed through environmental laws during his administration, he had the support of many Great Plains Democrats, the old "prairie populists."
There is no reason why Midwest farmers cannot compel their legislators to make a choice between supporting environmental laws or finding a new line of work.
Trump and time are not on the side of our planet's continued well-being. That is why action by Congress must be taken now.
Wayne Madsen is a progressive commentator and blogger (www.waynemadsenreport.com).

Graphic

 
Photograph by: AP Photo/ Mary Esch

Load-Date: February 7, 2017


End of Documen
t



David Goodrich's 'Hole in the Wind': Bicycling through climate change and denial
The Philadelphia Inquirer
July 30, 2017 Sunday, WEB Edition


Copyright 2017 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: FEATURES MAGAZINE / ENTERTAINMENT; P-com Ent. Entertainment; Pg. 00
Length: 447 words
Body


A Hole in the WindA Climate Scientist's Bicycle Journey Across the United States
By David Goodrich
Pegasus. 249 pp. $27.95
Reviewed by
 Alan Fallow
Climate scientist David Goodrich was riding his Trek 520 touring bike along a desolate stretch of Wyoming's Highway 287 when a storm boiled up from the west, catching him out in the open. "I was rapidly folded up in darkness, gusting winds, and lightning flashes," he writes in A Hole in the Wind, a detail-rich chronicle of the half-dozen epic bike rides he has done since 2000, including a 2011 cross-country trip. "There was nothing to do but ball up low on the side of the road, away from the metal bike, and get drenched. I comforted myself that the steel roadside reflectors were a little higher than me." Goodrich makes no allegorical hay of the incident, but it crystallizes his larger message: We live at the mercy of the elements - a dependency that should motivate us to combat climate change. 
Goodrich is a good enough reporter - and a sufficiently gifted stylist - to make the miles fly by. And he must have propitiated the cycling gods, for he suffered only one flat tire the entire ride.
Denial seems to be washing in on the tide up and down the Eastern Seaboard. Goodrich shows how climate change - a fact endorsed by 97 percent of climate scientists - has been polemicized by documentaries such as The Great Global Warming Swindle and screeds such as The Greatest Hoax: How the Global Warming Conspiracy Threatens Your Future (penned by a certain Oklahoma senator). You can talk about the weather, he concludes, but not the climate.
So how do you avoid boring readers when narrating a lengthy bike trip with a lofty purpose? You can leaven your text with the occasional harrowing run-in - a pack of vicious dogs in Missouri, say, or railroad tracks that toss you over the handlebars in Kansas - but ultimately you must persuade readers they could tag along and enjoy your company.
Goodrich does just that, whether it's detailing his mythic quest for the perfect college-town coffee shop ("Strange music must fill the air, with lots of people talking intently") or describing a camping adventure that inadvertently flaunts his range as poet-scientist-humorist: "That night in Montana's fire-ravaged Boulder Valley, wind blew the smoke away and the sky exploded in stars. The earth turned toward Sagittarius and the center of the galaxy, the brightest part of the Milky Way. I fell asleep listening to coyotes in the draw."
Next morning, he awakes to the sound of water. A dog is relieving itself on his tent.
Fallow is a freelance writer and book editor in Alexandria, Va. This review originally appeared in the Washington Post.

Load-Date: July 30, 2017


End of Documen
t



Climate change, minus the hot air; What scientists know - "what cannot be denied" - about global warming, carbon dioxide, the greenhouse effect.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
December 14, 2009 Monday, CITY-C Edition


Copyright 2009 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: FEATURES MAGAZINE; Inq Daily Magazine; Pg. D01
Length: 1585 words
Byline: By Faye Flam

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


When it comes to public understanding of climate change - the forecast is hazy with a 90 percent chance of confusion. Is it a threat to life as we know it? Is it a hoax perpetrated by some bicycle-riding, SUV-hating, tofu-eating eggheads? 
In Copenhagen, President Obama is scheduled to speak on Friday as world leaders continue to work out strategies to curb the world's ever-increasing carbon emissions. 
Meanwhile, critics are still pointing to a cache of leaked e-mails that hackers stole from climate scientists. Some see evidence of data manipulation and deliberate exclusion of dissenting views. Others say the e-mails are just a distraction and do not begin to challenge centuries of research indicating a problem. 
Where does the politics end and the science begin? A few basic questions may help clear some of the smog.
Who came up with this greenhouse gas concept and how seriously is it taken? 
According to physicist and historian Spencer Weart, the idea can be traced to French mathematician Joseph Fourier. Back in the 1820s, Fourier did some calculations to show that a rock like Earth orbiting at 93 million miles from the sun should be a big snowball. He suggested our balmy temperatures could be attributed to our atmosphere, which might hold in heat - sort of like a greenhouse. 
There wasn't much experimental evidence to back this up until the 1850s, when British scientist John Tyndall started shining infrared light through various gases.
Tyndall knew the Earth absorbs solar radiation and emits infrared. If the greenhouse theory was right, gases that make up the atmosphere would absorb some of this infrared, thus raising the temperature.
At first he almost disproved the greenhouse effect by showing that infrared passes straight through oxygen and nitrogen - the main components of our atmosphere. But before he quit, Tyndall tried a few other gases, including CO2, and found it was a powerful absorber of infrared. Water vapor had the same property.
That suggested that while carbon dioxide makes up less than 0.001 percent of our atmosphere, it's working along with water vapor to prevent infrared radiation from escaping to space. These gases also emit radiation, some of which is directed back toward the ground. "As a dam built across a river causes a local deepening of the stream, so our atmosphere . . . produces a local heightening of temperature at Earth's surface," Tyndall wrote.
But people liked the greenhouse analogy and that one stuck, even though a greenhouse heats through a different mechanism.
Did Al Gore invent the idea of human-generated global warming? 
No. It was the lesser known Arvid Hogbom who first suggested that humans might alter the climate by burning coal. 
It was the dawn of the 20th century and scientists of the time were competing to figure out what caused the ice ages. It had become well accepted that carbon dioxide in the atmosphere exerted a powerful warming effect - and so it followed that a drop in carbon dioxide might lead to cooling. 
One theory was that carbon dioxide waxed and waned with volcanic activity - and this drove the cycle of ice ages. 
Hogbom, perhaps out of curiosity, decided to calculate how much additional carbon dioxide was being sent into the air from coal burning. He found to the shock of many that it was comparable to volcanoes. 
That was enough to persuade Swedish chemist Svante Arrhenius to look into the matter. He calculated that if coal burning doubled atmospheric CO2, the global average temperature would rise by about 5 degrees Celsius - a little more than many climate scientists predict today, but in the ballpark.
Did people freak out when they heard this? It wasn't a big concern at first, said Weart, author of the 2003 book The Discovery of Global Warming. For one thing, the population was fewer than a billion people and per-capita energy consumption was a quarter what it is today. At the rate they were going, it looked as if it would take a thousand years to double the world's CO2. 
Also, these guys were in Sweden, so warmer weather didn't sound so bad. 
But by the 1930s, a few scientists started to warn that with population and energy use rising, the CO2 component of the atmosphere would probably double sometime in the 21st century. They suspected that the rise would start to have a noticable effect by around 2000. 
How do we know carbon dioxide is building up in the atmosphere? 
This was an important scientific question in the 1950s. Some argued that all the CO2 we added from coal burning would dissolve in the oceans. 
Others decided to see for themselves. American geophysicist Charles David Keeling did some of the most meticulous work, said Weart, traveling to Mauna Loa and the South Pole to get pure, representative samples of air. 
He found that even year to year, the CO2 was rising - going from 311 to 314 parts per million from 1957 to 1958. 
To see whether this represented a longer-term trend, a French-Soviet team took core samples from Antarctic ice and found a way to measure the CO2 in the bubbles. That showed the preindustrial carbon dioxide at about 290 ppm. (It's now at 389 ppm.) 
The ice-core work also showed that carbon dioxide levels rose and fell in sync with temperature. While the cycle of ice ages appears to be driven by an interplay between the Earth's distance from the sun and the tilt of its axis, CO2 may have amplified those changes.
Is the Earth really getting warmer or were measurements faked? Estimates of global temperatures have been the subject of a recent flap dubbed "climategate." A group of hacked e-mails cast doubt over one influential group in England. 
The most serious accusations seem to relate to data and analysis from the 1980s that were destroyed or lost. 
Meanwhile, other groups tracking temperatures have noted a rise over the 20th century. 
But these may not even represent the most critical evidence, said Peter Pilewskie, an atmospheric physicist at the University of Colorado. "Thermodynamically, global average temperature has almost no meaning," he said. If the extra carbon from human activity is absorbing more energy and adding kinetic energy to the atmosphere, this could manifest itself with complicated regional effects, he said. 
"If you want to see climate change, look no further than the Arctic," he said, where sea ice is melting even faster than predicted by some of the most dire forecasts. "That can't be denied."
How do we know humans are to blame? "It's a process of elimination," said Pilewskie, who studies changes in the sun. Nothing unusual has been going on with the sun in the last 30 years, he said. Others have noted that nothing unusual is occurring with volcanoes. The one thing we know has changed is the CO2 component of the atmosphere - it's risen about 30 percent since the start of the industrial revolution. 
"What cannot be denied," he said, "is that there has been an increase in CO2 and this increases the infrared opacity of the atmosphere and therefore increases the atmospheric greenhouse effect." 
Do carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases cause warming on other planets? Yes, said David Grinspoon, a planetary scientist and curator of astrobiology at the Denver Museum of Nature & Science. The greenhouse effect is essential for understanding Venus and Mars. 
"On the most basic level, planetary science shows that the greenhouse effect is real and that global change is real," he said. "If we were wrong about the basic physics of carbon dioxide greenhouse warming, we would not be able to predict surface temperatures of Venus and Mars." 
Both of our neighboring planets, he said, have gone through catastrophic climate shifts thanks to changes in the greenhouse effect. 
Various lines of evidence suggest Venus and Mars were more temperate in the past, but Mars lost most of its atmosphere, while Venus' atmosphere thickened through what's called a runaway greenhouse effect. Today Venus' surface is hot enough to melt lead. 
In the late 1970s, long before Al Gore popularized climate change, astronomer Carl Sagan was talking about the greenhouse effect and making connections between our planet and our neighbors. 
Why should we obsess about carbon dioxide when water vapor is the dominant greenhouse gas? Because carbon dioxide is the driving force while water passively follows it, said Grinspoon. If we had no carbon dioxide, our planet would be frozen solid. 
Water condenses and freezes at a higher temperature than carbon dioxide, he said, and the vapor in the atmosphere couldn't sustain itself without the carbon dioxide. Without our carbon dioxide, we'd freeze.
How hot will it get? This is where experts remain uncertain. Without some drastic changes, carbon dioxide will almost certainly double before the end of the 21st century. Most estimates for the resulting temperature rise range from 2 to 4.5 degrees C. 
Much of the wiggle room today centers on feedback loops, said Gerry North, a climate scientist at Texas A&M University. 
"Most people in the field believe as you warm the climate, water vapor in the atmosphere will increase," he said, leading to more warming in a positive feedback loop. 
But the models are clouded by clouds. Warming can increase clouds and they can cause either cooling or warming depending on a bunch of other complex factors. 
"Climate modeling is hard," said Grinspoon. "I don't believe everything a climate modeler says . . . but I believe global warming is a very serious concern."
Contact staff writer Faye Flam at 215-854-4977 or fflam@phillynews.com.  

Graphic

 
Feed Loader

Load-Date: December 14, 2009


End of Documen
t



Should the next president ban fracking?; Yes: Fracking will hasten the destruction from climate change.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 21, 2020 Friday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A15
Length: 837 words
Byline: Karen Feridun
Body


ABSTRACT
Yes: Fracking will hasten the destruction from climate change.
Pennsylvania is ground zero for the national debate over fracking. Ranking only behind Texas, the state charts as the second-largest producer of natural gas in the U.S., driven largely by fracking - a process that shoots high-pressure liquid into the ground to release oil and gas.
Presidential candidates including Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren have called to ban fracking as too destructive to the environment, given the methane it releases into the atmosphere, and its potentially contaminating effects in water and elsewhere. But fracking, pushed by both the Obama and Trump administrations, has been key to the U.S. becoming the world's biggest oil and gas producer and created jobs in the energy industry.
The struggle between environmental and economic concerns has big stakes in swing state Pennsylvania, where presidential candidates' positions on fracking can make or break their campaigns with environmental advocates on one side, and union workers protective of energy jobs on the other. High-profile Pennsylvania politicians including Lt. Gov. John Fetterman and Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto have expressed concern that a Democrat who wants to ban fracking cannot win the state.
The Inquirer turned to Fetterman and Karen Feridun, the founder of a grassroots environmental organization, to answer: Should the next U.S. president work to ban fracking?
We are on track to leave to future generations a world that is far worse than the one we inherited. If we are to hope for a better outcome, we must stop producing greenhouse gases. The next U.S. president must ban fracking, and Congress must help.
Climate scientists are urging us to leave all fossil fuels in the ground so that they'll never be burned. That includes natural gas, which needs to stay there so it doesn't leak either.
Methane molecules that leak during every stage of natural gas production hit the atmosphere at 100 times carbon dioxide's global warming potential. Molecules entering the atmosphere as you read this will still be there when we have run out of time to address the climate crisis. Fracking is not the only source of methane leakage, but may be responsible for about a third of emissions increases from all sources over the past decade, a recent study found.
Some states, like Maryland and New York, have already instituted bans, but no major gas-producing states are among them. In Pennsylvania, the second-biggest gas producer in the nation and a state responsible for about 1% of greenhouse gas emissions worldwide, shale gas development has enjoyed strong bipartisan support. Politicians' show of fracking support has repeated in state after state, as have the profound impacts politicians all too often ignore.
More than 1,500 peer-reviewed studies point to a wide range of adverse impacts from fracking on air quality, water quality, and economic outcomes, among many others. We are learning about more impacts every day. At least 35 studies considering these effects have been published so far this year. Fracking has been linked to a long list of adverse health effects that include low birth weight, high-risk pregnancy, endocrine disorders, cardiac conditions, neurological conditions, and some cancers. Families in the rural counties where fracking began in Pennsylvania fear that it is the cause of an alarming increase in rare childhood cancers.
Support for shale gas development continues despite warnings from the financial community that the fracking experiment has failed. At an industry conference last year, Steve Schlotterbeck, former CEO of EQT, one of the nation's leading gas producers, called the shale gas revolution an "unmitigated disaster." EQT was among the Pittsburgh-based fracking companies that together cut more than 400 jobs last year. The climate movement is working to ensure a just transition for communities and workers so nobody is left behind.
The dire analyses have only caused politicians to work harder to keep fracking alive. In Pennsylvania, HB 1100, a bill that would provide massive incentives to the petrochemical industry to make plastics from fracked natural gas liquids, passed easily this month. Gov. Tom Wolf has promised to veto the bill, but his Restore Pennsylvania infrastructure plan includes its own incentives for plastics manufacturers.
To borrow a metaphor from Annie Leonard, executive director of Greenpeace, and Martin Bourque, executive director of the Ecology Center: When the bathtub is overflowing, what do you do first? Do you grab towels and start mopping up the water, or do you turn off the tap? Pro-fracking states have chosen a third option, a preposterous one: to turn up the pressure.
What communities in the shale fields, on the paths of pipelines, and near the sites of the attendant infrastructure already know is that there simply aren't enough towels. The next president must turn off the tap.
Karen Feridun is the founder of Berks Gas Truth and cofounder of the Better Path Coalition.

Load-Date: February 21, 2020


End of Documen
t



Shore flooding linked to climate change; A report from NOAA says high-tide floods are affecting housing prices and drainage systems.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
July 11, 2019 Thursday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: THE REGION; Pg. B1
Length: 774 words
Byline: Frank Kummer STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
A report from NOAA says high-tide floods are affecting housing prices and drainage systems.
The trend persists, and it's not good for New Jersey: Coastal towns continue to see increased high-tide flooding, inundating streets and basements - the result of sea level rise, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) said during a Wednesday teleconference.
In 2018, the number of hightide flooding days tied the U.S. record set in 2015, according to NOAA's fifth annual report on coastal high-tide flooding, also known as "nuisance" or "sunny day" flooding.
NOAA's definition of high-tide flooding is when water levels measured by tide gauges exceed national flooding thresholds. As the sea level rises, it no longer takes a strong storm or a hurricane to cause coastal high-tide flooding in New Jersey's oceanfront communities, back bays, and Delaware Bayshore region. Flooding can occur on clear, sunny days.
Sites in the Northeastern United States were hardest hit in the nation in 2018, with a median of 10 days of high-tide flooding, meaning that half had more than 10 days. Nationwide, the median number of high-tide flooding days was five.
The numbers do not necessarily reflect all flooding from nor'easters and other storms, just flooding during high tides that exceeded certain levels. Decades ago, flooding typically occurred only during powerful storms. Because of sea rise, flooding can now be caused by a steady breeze or change in coastal currents during high tides.
Locally, Atlantic City saw nine days of high-tide flooding in 2018, according to NOAA. The record for Atlantic City was 22 days in 2017. However, those numbers could look small by 2050, when high-tide flood days are expected to rise to 65 to 155 days.
Philadelphia saw eight days of high-tide flooding last year. The city sits at the confluence of the Schuylkill and the Delaware River, both impacted by tides from the Delaware Estuary. By 2050, NOAA forecasts there will be 30 to 105 days of flooding.
William Sweet, an oceanographer with NOAA's Center for Operational Oceanographic Products and Services, put the biggest driver squarely on climate change.
"It's really starting to take its toll," Sweet said of sea level rise.
High-tide flooding is not benign. It causes closures, overwhelms storm drains, and compromises infrastructure, scientists say.
As sea levels rise, storm-water systems can no longer handle the flow. Sweet said sea levels are rising about one inch every eight years. Flooding fills storm-water pipes, preventing rainwater from going into storm drains. As a result, the water floods streets and neighborhoods. Flooding also causes sewer systems to overflow into waterways.
Coastal flooding is increasing in frequency, depth, and extent in many areas of the U.S. due to ongoing increases in sea level. In New Jersey, sea level is impacted by both higher ocean levels because of melting ice caps and sinking land, known as subsidence.
The NOAA report was written by scientists who examined existing flood thresholds established by the National Weather Service. They looked for patterns in those thresholds based on tidal ranges as a way to create a standard that could be applied nationwide for measuring minor high-tide flooding, as well as moderate and major flooding in locations.
Minor, moderate, and major coastal flooding typically begin at about 0.5 meters (1 foot, 7 inches), 0.8 meters (2-foot-7), and 1.2 meters (3-foot-11), respectively, above multiyear averages of daily highest water levels.
NOAA's estimates are taken from a range of lower and higher continuation of carbon emissions. It also looked at influences of El Niño and La Niña years, which can impact weather.
High-tide flooding will become more chronic over the next few decades, according to the NOAA forecast. The goal of the report is to give communities information on risks they face to prepare for more flooding.
NOAA is certainly not alone in signaling warnings about the impact of sea level rise on coastal areas. In February, the First Street Foundation released a study on the impact of climate change on property values, singling out multiple New Jersey Shore communities as expected to be impacted. It found that though property values along the Shore certainly are increasing, there is a "relative" erosion of property values.
In other words, homes would be selling for more if not for shrinking shorelines, flooding, and storm surges associated with sea level rise, caused mainly by climate change. For example, a home that might have sold for $800,000 without those issues instead might sell for $650,000. fkummer@inquirer.com
215-854-2329 FrankKummer

Load-Date: July 11, 2019


End of Documen
t



Climate change: The local picture; Hotter summers, fewer species, and a changing N.J. coast are possible, but much is unclear.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
April 11, 2007 Wednesday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2007 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Inq Front Page; Pg. A01
Length: 1038 words
Byline: By Sandy Bauers

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


What could climate change mean here?
Summers as hot as Georgia's.
Maybe a salination system for your drinking water.
And imagine going for a swim at the new New Jersey coast and looking offshore to where your vacation home used to be.
Reporting on the expected long-term effects of climate change, a U.N. panel last week painted varying pictures, region by region, of devastation around the world.
If reaching agreement on how global warming would affect continents proved difficult, applying the findings locally - to, say, Pennsylvania and New Jersey - is harder still.
For now, there are "more questions than answers," said Danielle Kreeger, science director of the Partnership for the Delaware Estuary.
Given our temperate clime, we probably won't have an ecological wipeout such as the one Asia and Africa may face. But our grandchildren will be living in a different world.
Even now, researchers say they believe the data hint at changes, from plants that flower ahead of schedule to early birds that sing sooner. Recent years have seen some of the biggest floods on record on the Delaware River; with potential changes in the Gulf Stream and other factors, precipitation could increase, prompting more flooding.
"The extremes seem to be getting more extreme," Kreeger said.
Although the broad concerns are becoming clearer, outright predictions are tricky. Depending on how much greenhouse-gas emissions are reduced - or not - the scenario for the region can vary widely.
By the end of the century, according to a November report from the Union of Concerned Scientists, sea levels in the northeastern United States could rise eight inches - or three feet.
Temperatures in this region could top 100 degrees nine days a year - or 28 days.
This region is particularly vulnerable to heat-related deaths because the weather is so variable, said Laurence Kalkstein, a University of Miami bioclimatologist. Instead of the constant heat of, say, Arizona, to which people can adapt, our temperatures in the 70s and 80s often are followed by a blast in the 90s. 
"Already, without climate change, we have more deaths from heat than any other weather-related cause," he said. "We can expect these numbers to only increase."
Kalkstein, who helped develop Philadelphia's noted heat-alert plan, said other urban areas needed to follow suit. "We are very unprepared, and we should be doing something about this," he said.
As for plants and animals, biodiversity almost certainly will decline, although some species will gain ground and others will lose out.
Pennsylvania forest species - such as the hermit thrush and Canada warbler, whose nesting habitats have already been damaged by deer - worry ornithologists.
And the forests themselves could change: more sweetgum, black cherry and American beech; fewer sweet birches, white oaks and black oaks. Even now in Southeastern Pennsylvania, the hemlock - Pennsylvania's state tree - is hanging on to cooler microhabitats, such as northern slopes.
Pests that are normally killed in cold winters might have a field day. And not just agricultural pests, but public-health threats such as the ticks that carry Lyme disease.
With rising sea levels, the beach-nesting piping plover could go. Intertidal feeding areas for shorebirds, which congregate in masses each spring in a spectacle that generates millions of tourism dollars, might decline substantially. 
Increasing bay salinity could push the embattled Delaware Bay oyster over the edge. Likewise, if the salt line in the Delaware River is pushed far enough upstream by rising sea levels, it could threaten public water intakes and contaminate the underground aquifer much of central New Jersey depends on for drinking water.
Not all the changes are bad - at first. Longer growing seasons might lead to more productive crops. Some say warmer years could enhance tourism at the Shore - but eventually make the tourists more likely to be affected by hurricanes.
That brings up another area of concern: New Jersey's 127-mile shoreline, which Benjamin Horton, a coastal scientist with the University of Pennsylvania, said had "the highest possible vulnerability to sea-level rise." 
Over the last 5,000 years, sea-level rise has been about 1.8 millimeters a year. Now, it is 3 to 4 millimeters a year - "a massive acceleration," Horton said.
Because the surrounding land is sinking, he said, Atlantic City has one of the fastest-rising sea-level rates on the Eastern Seaboard.
A January report by Rutgers University and the American Littoral Society concluded that, because of intensifying weather systems, what is considered a 100-year storm along the Jersey coast today would amount to a mere 30-year storm by 2100.
Such an event would inundate all of New Jersey's barrier islands, including about 90 square miles of primarily residential development.
Marshes that serve as teeming nurseries for fish and buffers against raging oceans would disappear.
In the Delaware estuary, Melanie Vile, a Villanova University biologist, and David Velinsky, senior scientist at the Academy of Natural Sciences, are taking a new look at the fragile freshwater tidal marshes that line the shores of many streams.
Although the ranges of some wildlife and plants are expanding northward, researchers say it's unlikely that species - let alone entire ecosystems - could migrate fast enough to keep up with climate change. 
"Things just don't evolve and adapt as fast as they would need to," said Ann Rhoads, senior botanist at the Morris Arboretum. 
So researchers are beginning to look at mitigation.
"Let's say you're doing a wetlands restoration or a riparian-corridor restoration," Kreeger said. "Do you want to pick trees historically found here, or would you be smarter to think about restoration trajectories? We're talking a lot about this."
The Rutgers report analyzed land use within 500 meters of salt marshes and found that 44 percent was still natural.
There's still hope, said Tim Dillingham, the littoral society's executive director.
"If we can get smart enough quick enough" - and if there's sufficient political will - "there's still an opportunity to protect some of these vital coastal ecosystems."
Contact staff writer Sandy Bauers at 215-854-5147 or sbauers@phillynews.com. 

Load-Date: June 13, 2007


End of Documen
t



Climate change could cost N.J. billions
The Philadelphia Inquirer
August 4, 2008 Monday, JERSEY-D Edition


Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: PHILADELPHIA; P-com News; Pg. B01
Length: 789 words
Byline: By Cynthia Henry

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


Climate change will wallop New Jersey by 2100, endangering lives and causing tens of billions of dollars in losses, according to a recent report issued by the University of Maryland. 
The study, part of a project that looked at eight states, was prepared for the National Conference of State Legislators. It follows an international shift toward research on the economic consequence of climate change and adaptation policies rather than how to prevent the change. 
"If there's a bottom line in this research, it's that delaying action carries a significant cost," said Matthias Ruth, director of the university's Center for Integrative Environmental Research and the study's author. 
If global warming continues unabated, the report predicts: 
New Jersey's coast, including Atlantic City, will flood every one to two years, potentially endangering 60 percent of the state's population and threatening $106 billion in real estate. 
Heavily paved Camden will broil in summer, driving up heat-related deaths 55 percent by 2020. 
Lacking cold winters, Jersey orchards will stop bearing apples and berries. 
Native birch, beech and maple trees will disappear from the state's forests. 
Low-lying access roads could flood, cutting off ports and jeopardizing $100 million in commercial fishing and $42 billion in manufacturing. 
"New Jersey will experience among the hardest hits" in the nation, said Ruth, whose organization also researched the economic effect of global warming on Colorado, Georgia, Kansas, Illinois, Michigan, Nevada and Ohio. Four more case studies are due out in the fall. 
In the last century, New Jersey has experienced rising temperatures, increased precipitation, more frequent severe weather, and a sea level rising at nearly twice the average rate worldwide, according to the report, made public on July 23. 
If climate change progresses unchecked, the study predicted, an estimated 1 percent to 3 percent of the state's 210-mile shoreline will be inundated by 2100. 
As conditions worsen, tourists will stay away, resulting in an economic loss of more than $3.7 billion a year as early as 2017, researchers concluded. Also lost would be 40,000 jobs. 
Addressing beach erosion would cost $6 billion over the next 50 years, the report said. Ruth dismissed measures such as beach replenishment as Band-Aids.  
"Minor adjustments here or there ain't going to cut it," he said. "This is a wound that's about to break open." 
Ruth said states should serve as public policy laboratories providing lessons to the federal government. California, Maryland and Massachusetts are leading the way. 
He predicted larger and more frequent storms and hurricanes, and floods that roads, bridges and homes could not withstand. 
By 2050, catastrophic storms "will occur once every 30 years or once every 40 years, but we're still designing as if they occur every 100 years," Ruth said. 
New Jersey has been "relatively aggressive" in its policies to address global warming, said Judi Greenwald, director of innovative solutions at the Pew Center for Global Climate Change in Washington.  
It is a member of the multistate Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, a market-based program to reduce power-plant emissions, Greenwald said. It also has a renewable portfolio standard to encourage production of cleaner electricity and a "clean-car" program to reduce vehicle emissions. 
Last year, Gov. Corzine signed a law to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 20 percent by 2020 and 80 percent by 2050. 
"But everybody has to do more," Greenwald said. "The climate is more vulnerable than we thought. We're seeing changes faster than we expected to see them." 
Ruth said he sympathized with area farmers who see some benefit to global warming. But he predicted that gains resulting from one decade of longer growing seasons would be offset by the end of the century by continually rising temperatures, pests and diseases.  
Dairy cows would suffer from heat stress, according to the report, and apples and berries would fail to develop properly. 
Camden's summer temperatures are now 7 to 10 degrees higher than those of nearby suburbs. Over time, Camden and other cities would become dangerously hot, especially for those with respiratory and other diseases. 
Ruth recommends incorporating more green space into urban planning. 
"Historically, when we looked at the climate change challenge, we asked how much it was going to cost to cut carbon emissions, totaled the expenses, and threw up our hands at the expense; so we didn't do anything," Ruth said. "This study shows there is a cost to inaction." 
To read "Economic Impacts of Climate Change on New Jersey," go to http://tinyurl.com/654722
Contact staff writer Cynthia Henry at 856-779-3970 or chenry@phillynews.com. 

Load-Date: August 4, 2008


End of Documen
t



Climate change forecast to alter the Pine Barrens
The Philadelphia Inquirer
December 23, 2014 Tuesday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2014 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: front_page; P-com News for PC Home Page; Pg. A01
Length: 993 words
Byline: By Dave Levitan

For The Inquirer
Body


Due to climate change, the iconic New Jersey forest known as the Pine Barrens may start to lose its namesake trees over the next century, a recent study concludes. 
 As temperatures rise, the Pine Barrens may become the Oak Barrens.
 "The regeneration potential of pitch pine - the likelihood that they would be able to establish in a place - really plummets in the middle of the century, and that's purely a climate change signal," said Alec Kretchun, a forest ecology researcher at Portland (Ore.) State University. 
 Kretchun led a recent study published in the journal PLOS One that used computer modeling to project what will happen to the Pine Barrens over the next 100 years. They found that obvious and quick-moving disturbances including gypsy moths and wildfires will not matter as much as the inexorable violence of rising temperatures. 
 The forest, now dominated by pitch pines, short-leaf pines, and a few other pine species, will shift toward an oak-dominated landscape instead.
 Climate change is just the latest in a long series of indignities humans have foisted on the Pine Barrens, the largest contiguous forest on the eastern seaboard. It occupies almost a quarter (22 percent) of New Jersey, stretching from near the northern end of Cape May almost all the way up to Route 195, 70 miles away.
 Logging, charcoal, and "bog iron" production, even glass making from the "barren" sandy soils, have shaped the forest for good or ill for hundreds of years.
 Oaks - the white, black, and chestnut varieties - have already been creeping into the Pine Barrens, thanks largely to fire suppression over the last century. Pines need areas of bare ground to take hold, and without fire, the forest floor is covered with litter. Pines are also very fire-resistant - some even need fire to release their seeds - while oaks are not. 
 In the future, the modeling done in Kretchun's study suggests that all those inputs will push further toward a more oak-dominated forest, leaving the whole system far more sensitive to disturbances such as gypsy moths and fires.
 Such a disturbance could open the door for pines again, but climate change says no: Kretchun said that by midcentury the pitch pine, one of the Barrens' dominant species, will have a much lower chance of reestablishing itself after a disturbance. 
 The species simply survives better in lower temperatures than will soon be common, and without fires, some of those pitch pine cones and seeds would never open. Kretchun's group's modeling showed a "probability" of establishing pitch pines dropping close to zero by 2050 or so.
 Gordon Bonan, of the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, e-mailed that this result relies solely on a single model that he called "rather dated." Ideally, studies like this would compare results from multiple models; others may have differing temperature increases or precipitation changes, all of which play into the forest's future composition.
 The best regulatory response to this is far from clear. Nancy Wittenberg, executive director of the New Jersey Pinelands Commission, which oversees the forest, agrees that climate change is "something we need to address," but "we have not in any formalized way done anything to date." 
 Wittenberg said that the commission's science office is aware of the Kretchun team's paper. "It's pretty early on for us," she said. "We are accumulating those kinds of research documents now and . . . just trying to wrap our arms around how climate change is an issue for the Pinelands, and what we as a regulatory agency should or shouldn't be doing."
 For now, simply keeping an eye on things is a start. Kenneth Clark, another of the study's authors, works for the U.S. Forest Service at the Silas Little Experimental Forest in the Pine Barrens. He explained how the Forest Service uses flux towers to measure how much carbon dioxide is actually entering and leaving the forest all the time. One such tower is surrounded by a stand of trees heavily dominated by oaks already, and the skeletal victims of a massive 2007 gypsy moth outbreak yields gaps in the canopy above.
 "As the temperature rises, carbon sequestration drops," Clark said, referring to the forest's ability to store carbon dioxide, which makes them a key tool in the fight to hold back global warming. So we could be creating dangerous feedback loops, he said: warming temperatures, less carbon sequestered, more warming temperatures, and so on.
 But warming may also lead to longer growing seasons, which means more time for leaves to store carbon. A "PhenoCam" on top of the flux tower, used to track vegetation, will help tease out that interaction in the future.
 A few hundred yards from the first sits a somewhat more solid-looking monitoring tower. Up the 56 feet of spiraling steps through the tower's innards, all that is visible are pines. Pitch pine and short-leaf pine dominate, though a slightly taller stand of nonnative loblolly pine stands a short ways off. 
 These are the trees that - excluding the loblolly - are in some sense "meant" to be here. Oaks, as well as enormous Atlantic white cedar (Kretchun compared them to sequoia trees, big enough "to drive a car through") that have all but disappeared here, likely used to have some hold before Europeans arrived, but pines have ruled for centuries at this point. 
 It requires a series of value judgments to pick one species of tree over another, but keeping pines is likely best for stability, said Amy Karpati, director of conservation science for the Pinelands Alliance. 
 But the way forward is unclear. "Climate change is a more difficult threat to tackle, because this stressor is not exclusively locally generated or locally solvable," Karpati said. All one can do in the Pine Barrens is try and restore fire regimes, keep out invasive species, and so on, she said. But if the modeling study is right, such actions won't really matter as temperatures rise.
davelevitan@gmail.com

Load-Date: December 23, 2014


End of Documen
t



City has plan for heat relief; To combat the effects of climate change, Phila. is focusing on developing ways for neighborhoods to cool off.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
July 25, 2019 Thursday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: THE REGION; Pg. B1
Length: 769 words
Byline: Frank Kummer STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
To combat the effects of climate change, Phila. is focusing on developing ways for neighborhoods to cool off.
Philadelphia has released its first plan for dealing with the impact of climate change on its neighborhoods, focusing first on Hunting Park, a section of North Philly that can run 22 degrees warmer than that is hotter than others because it has fewer trees, less green space, more exposed asphalt, and many black roofs, all of which decrease shade while increasing temperature, a phenomenon The Inquirer has reported on in depth.
Lower-income residents of color bear the brunt of this problem, a disparity the city acknowledges and says it wants to address. some other areas of the city during a heat wave.
Hunting Park, about 1.7 square miles in size, shares a heat-island effect during warm weather with neighborhoods such as Cobbs Creek, Point Breeze, and Strawberry Mansion. A heat island is an area
"Our goal was to really hear from residents and how they cope with heat," said Christine Knapp, director of the city's Office of Sustainability. "This document contains everything we heard from them over a nine-month period. It's what they see and would like to happen. So we can use this to work collaboratively with the city and other partners for a more resilient neighborhood."
The report contains recommendations on ways communities can deal with the heat. Some findings including:
Since 2010, Philadelphia has had its three hottest summers on record, with this summer not yet finished and included in the tally.
In the 20th century, the city experienced an average of four days per summer above 95 degrees. That could climb to an average of 52 days by 2100 based on projections.
Neighborhoods on the periphery of the city, such as Far Northeast and Chestnut Hill, can run 14 degrees, on average, cooler than neighborhoods clustered closer to the center of the city.
More than 75% of land cover in Hunting Park consists of buildings, roads, and paved surfaces compared with 52% of the city overall.
About 9% of Hunting Park is covered by tree canopy; about 19% of Philadelphia overall is covered.
The rate of asthma, made worse during high ozone days associated with heat, can be two or three times higher in Hunting Park and neighborhoods with similar demographics than elsewhere in the city.
For the plan, the city's Office of Sustainability, the lead agency in the effort, set up a Beat the Heat team. The team spoke to 600 Hunting Park residents and conducted a survey. The survey, with 530 respondents, found that most residents (84%) had access to some air-conditioning at home, even if only for a room or two. Yet most say the homes were still too hot and that high heat is an important issue within the community.
Though Hunting Park is named for an 87-acre park, many of its 30,000 residents do not go there even though it can be 6 to 12 degrees cooler than other parts of the community. Only one-quarter of residents said they are likely to go there because it is inconvenient or difficult to get to, because of traffic, and because it is poorly lit at night. In addition, many won't use the neighborhood's public pool because of overcrowding. Many people stay in their hot houses, unaware the city has designed cooling areas, such as public buildings.
Officials note that Hunting Park has a history associated with the practice of redlining - areas where banks, citing credit risks, would shun writing loans and mortgages. The practice helped concentrate poverty.
The city plans to launch a heat relief network this summer and begin to look at how climate change will impact other neighborhoods.
For now, officials have identified sites to create a potential heat relief network that would include churches, libraries, schools, recreation centers, and other locations. It's looking to increase the number of shaded bus shelters for residents awaiting transportation on hot days. And it plans to increase the number of trees planted, create more green spaces, and look to where roofs can be painted white or a lighter color to reflect the sun.
The plan makes a number of other recommendations that use existing programs, including improving access for residents to efficient air-conditioning units, establishing a "check-in" system for vulnerable residents during heat waves, creating a city heat website, offering free transportation on certain bus routes, and installing better lighting at Hunting Park.
The Knight Foundation and Partners for Places funded the plan.
Knapp said the plan can be used as a template for other neighborhoods in the future. fkummer@inquirer.com
215-854-2329 FrankKummer

Load-Date: July 25, 2019


End of Documen
t



Immigration woes tied to science; Battling effects of climate change could help stem mass migrations.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
April 28, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: CURRENTS; Pg. C1
Length: 724 words
Body


ABSTRACT
Battling effects of climate change could help stem mass migrations.
Let's stipulate right here that Presid e n t Tr u m p doesn't understand a lot of things, even as he enters his 28th month in charge of the massive bureaucratic battleship that is the U.S. government. But no issue has flummoxed our rage-prone 45th president more than the rise in unauthorized crossings at the U.S.-Mexico border - even after promising his xenophobic base that his harsh immigration crackdown would make America great again.
When numbers came into the White House showing this decade's biggest surge in refugees at the border - with Border Patrol agents detaining as many as 4,000 migrants, many of them women and children, in a single day - Trump reportedly went ballistic. He yelled and fumed at his then-Homeland Security secretary Kirstjen Nielsen until he finally forced her out of the job, partly because she wouldn't buy into the president's ideas to fight migration with moves that were probably illegal and unworkable and certainly immoral.
To Trump, migration is a ridiculously simplistic zero-sum game. The immigrants are cheaters, frauds, or out-and-out criminals, trying to take advantage of us (and, specifically, of Trump). Whether they "get away with it" is solely an equation that depends on how "tough" we are - on hard-nosed, head-shaved Border Patrol agents named Steve (probably), until Trump can force Congress to build a glorious wall that will make the problem go away.
Donald Trump can't handle the truth.
Because to do that, the Trump administration would have to do something alien to every xenophobic bone in its body: Embrace science. The president would have to stop cursing out and firing every official at DHS, stop rescuing oil lobbyists from the swamp and installing them in his Cabinet, and start accepting that climate change is real, that it's occurring right now, and that responses like mass migration are an unavoidably human reaction to drought, floods, and misery.
Experts (admittedly, non-persons in Trumpland) believe that a sizable portion of the recent steep increase in migrants making the long and dangerous journey from Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador are doing so because record drought in the region - the result of a warming planet - has destroyed crops and left destitute farmers desperate to save their families. Simply put, images of armed U.S. officers seizing kids at the border still won't deter parents who see the only alternative as famine and crushing poverty.
Conor Walsh, who works for Catholic Family Services in Honduras, wrote recently in the Arizona Daily Star that severe drought in neighboring Guatemala in 2018 resulted in significant crop loss for as many as 300,000 subsistence farmers there. Indeed, the cycle of arid days without rain and severe floods has become so pronounced in the key growing regions of Guatemala, El Salvador, and Honduras during the 2010s that the area is now called "the dry corridor." Experts note that the last big drought in 2014 matched up with the last big surge in U.S. border crossings.
Sebastian Charchalac, a Guatemalan agronomist who was running a program with about $200,000 in U.S. aid - a mere pittance in the Land of Billion-Dollar Stealth Bombers - told the New Yorker he was seeing real success in helping farmers diversify crops, conserve water, and, as a result, save their land. Then in 2017 the Trump administration arrived and killed the program.
Indeed, one element of Trump's rage-frenzied rampage over border crossings has been an announcement that the U.S. will end all foreign aid to the three key Central American nations - about $350 million to 400 million a year, already down sharply from the Obama years - as a spiteful punishment for the supposed failure to curb migration.
Ending foreign aid and covering our eyes and pretending that climate change doesn't exist are all but guaranteed to drive the number of refugees from Central America even higher. It may be the ultimate case of adopting hurtful, counterproductive policies because they "trigger the libs" and sate the blood lust of Trump rally crowds chanting "build the wall!" Instead of spending a few dollars to help struggling farmers, Team Trump will spend millions on tent cities that sure as hell look like concentration camps - dragging America further into the muck.

Load-Date: April 28, 2019


End of Documen
t



Climate-change skepticism's funding sources are obscure
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 11, 2014 Tuesday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2014 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Inq World & Nation; Pg. A03
Length: 851 words
Byline: by Sandy Bauers

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


In the high-stakes conflict over U.S. climate-change policy, groups that deny or cast doubt on global warming brought in $7.2 billion from 2003 through 2010 - less than a third of it publicly traceable to the donors.
 In a recently released study of 91 such organizations, a Drexel University professor found that $5.2 billion of their funding was "dark money" from undisclosed sources. Also of unknown origin: $78 million channeled by major benefactors through a special nonprofit that then redirected the money while keeping the givers' identities private.
 "Powerful funders are supporting the campaign to deny scientific findings about global warming," reported Robert J. Brulle, an environmental sociologist who studies strategies and funding patterns of what he terms the "climate change countermovement."
 Characterizing the "real issue" as "one of democracy," he added, "At the very least, American voters deserve to know who is behind these efforts."
 Advocates for a strong national response to global warming have hailed Brulle's work as exposing how big-money interests have manipulated the debate from the shadows.
 Just as vigorously, climate-change skeptics have assailed his study as a flawed and misleading polemic. It was based on a "bizarre assumption that the science is settled, that the groups are illegitimate," said Richard Lindzen, a senior fellow at the Cato Institute, one of the conservative organizations Brulle examined.
 The research is "less than worthless," said James Taylor, senior fellow for environment policy at the Heartland Institute, also a Brulle subject.
 Taylor challenged the professor's selection of groups, many of which support other causes as well. In some cases, Taylor said, less than 10 percent of their funding is spent on climate-related efforts.
 For his study, published in December in the journal Climatic Change, Brulle did not look at the income streams of environmental groups on the other side of the global-warming feud. He said he would do that next. When he does, Taylor predicted, Brulle will find not only more money, but more unsourced money from what are known as "donor-advised" or "donor-directed" funds.
 The funds are "something new" and "are completely transforming the face of philanthropy," said Ray Madoff, a Boston College Law School professor who has urged tighter regulation of them. "We're talking about corporate entities spending money on issues, and now it's not traceable."
 Instead of contributing directly to a cause, a donor gives money to a nonprofit fund, and specifies where it is to be sent. Such funds have to disclose where the money goes, but not its source.
 For individuals, donor-advised funds can be a way to ward off incessant mailings from charities. But for backers of the global-warming opposition, Brulle contends, it's a detour past public scrutiny.
 During the period he studied, Brulle found that Virginia-based Donors Trust Inc. and its associated Donors Capital Fund became increasingly prominent. "Launched" in 1999, according to its website, Donors Trust is "dedicated to the ideals of limited government, personal responsibility, and free enterprise."
 By 2009, Donors Trust was responsible for 25 percent of all foundation contributions to the 91 groups Brulle researched; nearly half had gotten something. The largest amount was $7.7 million in 2010 to the Americans for Prosperity Foundation, nearly half of the group's $16.9 million grant income that year.
 The rise of Donors Trust coincided with efforts by environmentalists to embarrass major patrons of conservative groups dismissive of climate change. Indeed, some cut back on direct contributions or declined or ceased.
 The Heartland Institute used to disclose its funders, said senior fellow Taylor, but "environmental groups took the opportunity to harass our donors." 
 Between 2005 and 2010, Heartland received $13.5 million from Donors Trust, according to the study.
 Brulle could not determine which contributors switched to the avenue of donor-advised funds. He found, though, that a foundation run by the billionaire Koch brothers started sending large grants to Donors Trust in 2008.The ExxonMobil Foundation, a former funder of climate change skeptic groups, cut funding completely, said spokesman Alan Jeffers: "We do not fund climate-change denial."
 Donors Trust chief financial officer Jeff Zysik defended donor-advised funds as legitimate, with anonymity only one of many benefits. "This whole argument that [they] are shadowy ATM machines," he said, "is a straw man."
 Last week, in a Senate floor speech, Rhode Island Democrat Sheldon Whitehouse called the process "an identity-laundering scheme . . . a deliberate, complex scheme of lies and propaganda."
 Brulle's study followed the money, said Naomi Oreskes, a Harvard University science professor and author of Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming.
 "It is a public need to know who is behind this," she said, "and who is paying for it."
sbauers@phillynews.com
  215-854-5147 @sbauers
www.inquirer.com/greenspace

Graphic

 
MICHAEL BRYANT / Staff

Load-Date: February 11, 2014


End of Documen
t



Inquirer Editorial: Climate change an issue again
The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 5, 2012 Monday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2012 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; P-com Nav Inquirer Opinion; Pg. A20
Length: 506 words
Body


Was Sandy persuasive enough to move climate change up on the national agenda?
 Before the killer storm wreaked havoc along the Eastern seaboard, global warming was hardly mentioned in the presidential race. In fact, President Obama has appeared reluctant to talk about the need to wean the nation from fossil fuels ever since the disastrous BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, although he does earn points for raising car and truck fuel-efficiency standards. 
 Meanwhile, Republican nominee Mitt Romney has been running a TV ad in Pennsylvania saying "I like coal" and deriding efforts to clean dirty coal plants. It's painful to see a man who as Massachusetts governor signed a law capping carbon emissions back away from that position on the presidential campaign trail.
 Unfortunately, the most prominent discussion of alternative energy in the presidential race has been in Republican attacks on the Obama administration's handling of Solyndra, the California solar-panel company that got a $535 million federal loan guarantee and then went bankrupt.
 It's no surprise that Romney, just as with other issues, has been hard to pin down on global warming. Maybe that's because of his deep-pocketed supporters in the oil and coal industries. "The Earth may be getting warmer, but there have been numerous times in the Earth's history when temperatures have been warmer than they are now," he said.
 One would have thought global warming would come up in Pennsylvania's U.S. Senate race, with coal company founder and global-warming doubter Tom Smith the Republican opponent of Democratic incumbent Bob Casey. But it hasn't happened.
 Whether politicians want to discuss it or not, climate change remains an issue to de dealt with - like waves pounding relentlessly on a bulkhead too low and too weak to hold back the sea.
 And although scientists can't pin Sandy on climate change, there is a relationship. Global warming causes higher water temperatures and rising sea levels - factors that increase a storm's destructive power. The warmer the air, the more moisture it can hold before unleashing it. An analysis by the Union of Concerned Scientists says coastal flooding and extreme rain amounts are "strongly linked to human-induced climate change and are expected to get worse in the future."
 Sandy's death toll and the billions of dollars in property and business losses it caused are a clear demonstration of the planet's fragility. Who knows how long it will take for the Jersey Shore and New York to recover from this devastating storm? 
 Independent New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg emphasized Obama's record on climate change in endorsing him. "While the increase in extreme weather we have experienced in New York City and around the world may or may not be the result of [global warming], the risk that it might be - given this week's devastation - should compel all elected leaders to take immediate action," Bloomberg said.
 It's a shame that politicians this season didn't discuss what America should do about climate change.    

Load-Date: November 5, 2012


End of Documen
t



A model of corporate action; DuPont has cut emissions that cause climate change 72%. And leads the call for a national pollution plan.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 15, 2007 Thursday


Copyright 2007 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A23
Length: 836 words
Body


Cynthia Henry
covers energy and the environment for The Inquirer Editorial Board
Businesses don't often lobby government for tougher environmental rules. Usually, they fight (or sue) over federal regulation.
But one voice, DuPont, based in Wilmington, leads a corporate chorus calling for a national crackdown on climate change. Forward-looking businesses realize they can't slow global warming alone. They need government to drive technology innovation and maintain economic growth, while slashing tailpipe and smokestack pollution, the leading contributors to global warming.
Not that DuPont hasn't been trying. It crafted one of the best voluntary efforts in the nation - beyond the Bush administration's wildest hopes.
"DuPont understood almost before anyone else that climate change was happening, and that affected what they produced or the way they produced it," said Eileen Claussen, president of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change.
Since 1991, DuPont has cut corporate emissions contributing to global warming 72 percent, saving itself more than $3 billion in energy costs. Along with other corporate leaders, such as BP, Shell and Alcoa, it models best behavior for businesses just writing environmental plans, like Wal-Mart.
President Bush visited DuPont the day after the State of the Union in January. He saw future biofuels bubbling in beakers, photovoltaic panels generating electricity from the sun, and fuel cells that could transform military operations.
He studied DuPont's 21st-century goals: Through partnerships with the Department of Energy and like-minded companies such as BP, DuPont vows to double R&D on products such as biobutanol, a higher-yielding, more transportable renewable fuel than ethanol. It's creating plant-based chemicals like Bio-PDO to replace petroleum in polymers, detergents, cosmetics and antifreeze.
By 2015, DuPont vows to slash water consumption, improve fleet fuel efficiency, and cut cancer-causing emissions at its plants. If the past is any indication, DuPont will succeed.
The company's focus on atmospheric science dates to the ozone depletion in the 1980s caused by chlorofluorocarbons, one of the company's main products. DuPont scientists scrambled to create CFC alternatives to save the Earth - and the company's bottom line.
They sought the same business/environmental twofer by pioneering global-warming mitigation. Beyond reducing its corporate "carbon footprint," DuPont diversified its product line, shedding divisions such as nylon and pharmaceuticals, to focus on materials to reduce greenhouse gases. Big winners include Tyvek house wraps for energy efficiency and Sorona carpet fibers, which soon will come from plants.
Looking to adapt its array of materials to new uses, DuPont constantly asks: "What else?" and "What next?" For the world to temper climate change, more companies need that mind-set.
DuPont's biggest challenge may be motivating Congress.
On Tuesday, CEO Chad Holliday lobbied the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee, whose former chairman, James M. Inhofe (R., Okla.), considered global warming "a hoax." New chairwoman Barbara Boxer (D., Calif.) promises to give fair hearing to the legislative options emerging. As a pioneer in carbon mitigation, DuPont deserves a seat at the policy table and credit for progress to date.
"Voluntary efforts alone will not solve the problem," Holliday told senators. "We need sound policy that takes broad, coordinated action across the entire economy."
He testified on behalf of DuPont, but also as a member of the newly formed United States Climate Action Partnership, comprising 10 diverse companies and three environmental groups favoring emission regulation. It's one of several sustainable business roundtables DuPont has joined over the years.
"Each year we delay action to control emissions increases the risk of unavoidable consequences that could necessitate even steeper reductions in the future, at potentially greater economic cost and social disruption," says USCAP's position paper.
The partnership, whose members include an oil company and utilities, urges Congress to enact mandatory, market-based reductions of greenhouse-gas emissions from industrial plants, cars and trucks, and commercial and residential buildings.
That's the logical, overdue response to this month's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report. More than 1,200 scientists from 113 countries agreed that global warming was "unequivocal," likely to accelerate in the 21st century, and adversely affect weather, drought, rainfall and sea level.
America can no longer depend only on the DuPonts to initiate change. Mitigation is possible, but not without a governmental push.
"DuPont has shown that it's possible to do well by doing good," said Phil Clapp, president of National Environmental Trust. "If the Bush administration and Congress had demonstrated as much commitment, we'd be well on our way to solving the problem of global warming."
Contact Cynthia Henry at chenry@phillynews.com or 215-854-2959.

Load-Date: February 15, 2007


End of Documen
t



Coalition takes aim at Amazon; Group focuses on issues ranging from labor rights and climate change to digital surveillance.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 28, 2019 Thursday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. A19
Length: 546 words
Byline: Juliana Feliciano Reyes STAFF WRITER
Body


ABSTRACT
Group focuses on issues ranging from labor rights and climate change to digital surveillance.
In 2017, as cities and states including Philadelphia and Delaware built out lavish incentive packages and sales pitches in hopes of luring Amazon's second headquarters, a resistance emerged.
Critics worried about the displacement of residents, the company's surveillanceheavy labor practices, and the logic of offering billions of dollars in financial incentives to a company owned by one of America's richest men. Organizers eventually succeeded in pushing Amazon out of one of its chosen locations: Long Island City, Queens.
It was an early sign of the backlash against Amazon, a corporation that had long enjoyed an image as a trailblazing disrupter.
The nascent movement to hold Amazon accountable gained momentum this week when a grassroots coalition, focused on issues ranging from labor rights and climate change to digital surveillance, launched an organization called Athena.
Athena, the group said, aims "to stop Amazon's increasing stranglehold on our economy, democracy, people, and planet."
Amazon is projected to have $238 billion in sales this year. It employs 750,000 people. Its CEO, Jeff Bezos, is one of the richest people in the world.
The coalition, backed in part by billionaire George Soros, includes some national organizations with a Philadelphia presence, such as worker-organizing group Jobs with Justice, Showing Up for Racial Justice, and the Walmart accountability project United for Respect.
Athena partners call the effort a David vs. Goliath situation. The coalition is raising $15 million for its first three years, the New York Times reported.
Athena's launch comes as reports and investigations continue to indicate dangerous working conditions for Amazon employees and contractors responsible for the speedy and convenient delivery the corporation is known for - and as fledgling groups of workers, mostly low-wage warehouse staff, are starting to take public action against their employer.
On Monday, workers at an Amazon warehouse on Staten Island that employs more than 2,500 delivered a list of demands, signed by 600 workers, to management. Among them: longer break times, since most of their closely monitored 15-minute break is spent walking to and from the break room in the massive warehouse, and free transportation to the warehouse, as some commute two or three hours to work.
Earlier this fall, 60 workers at a delivery center near the Minneapolis airport staged their second walkout, demanding higher wages for night shift workers and weight restrictions on boxes. A group of workers in Sacramento, Calif., protested the firing of a worker who went one hour over her bereavement leave after her mother-in-law died.
Amazon's office workers, like their peers at Google and Microsoft, also have organized. In the first white-collar Amazon walkout, more than 1,500 "Amazonians" protested their employer's impact on the environment.
The Philadelphia area is home to several Amazon warehouses, including a recently opened location in West Deptford that the company says employs more than 1,500, another in King of Prussia, and a "Prime Now" warehouse in Philadelphia's University City neighborhood. jreyes@inquirer.com
2158545517 juliana_f_reyes

Load-Date: November 28, 2019


End of Documen
t



Fearing Trump, Penn scholars move to preserve climate-change data
The Philadelphia Inquirer
December 14, 2016 Wednesday, WEB Edition


Copyright 2016 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: WEB; P-com Health & Science; Pg. WEB
Length: 454 words
Byline: Tom Avril

STAFF WRITER
Body


A lonely buoy on Hog Reef, in the ocean north of Bermuda, has been steadily measuring levels of carbon dioxide, salinity, and other climate indicators for much of the last decade -- one of dozens of such stations scattered around the globe.
Concerned that the incoming Trump administration may be dismissive of            climate science,a group of University of Pennsylvania scholars has joined an effort to protect these measurements and many others housed on U.S. government websites.
The group has started compiling lists of climate data sets and has been talking with tech companies and other universities about backing them up on nongovernment servers, said Bethany Wiggin, director of the            Penn Program in the Environmental Humanities.
The Trump transition team has not expressed any intent to hide data, much less to get rid of it, which would be illegal. The transition team declined to comment.
But Wiggin said it was smart to be prepared.
"We're not saying it's going to happen, but we're saying commonsense precaution would say, `Better safe than sorry,' " said Wiggin, also a professor of Germanic languages and literature.
Trump and several of his cabinet picks have expressed skepticism that human activity plays a significant role in climate change, despite overwhelming agreement among researchers that it does. Average global temperatures have risen 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit since the late 19th century, a shift scientists attribute primarily to the increase in atmospheric greenhouse gases from burning fossil fuels. Effects include            rising sea levels.
Collaborators in the data-preservation effort include the University of Toronto and Eric Holthaus, a meteorologist who writes for the Washington Post. Wiggin and her colleagues are holding a "data rescue" strategizing event at Penn on Jan. 13 and 14, working with the university's library system, she said.
Asked for examples of when access to environmental data was threatened in the past, she said it had been removed from certain federal websites under the administration of President George W. Bush.
"It's not like data gets deleted. It just becomes so difficult to access it that you really have to use FOIA to get it," Wiggin said, referring to the Freedom of Information Act.
In 2006, for example, the State Department quietly "retired" a collection of links to climate research, according to the Union of Concerned Scientists.
The data that Penn and Toronto seek to protect include measurements of temperature, sea level, greenhouse-gas emissions, and airborne toxic chemicals. They are typically enormous and would outstrip the capacity of most computer servers. Asked about the private partners who might help archive them, Wiggin said she was not yet allowed to say. 

Graphic

 
Photograph by: TOM GRALISH / Staff Photographer

Load-Date: December 15, 2016


End of Documen
t



Giving a greater say to the future; The idea: The longer the remaining life expectancy, the more weight a vote would have. Could climate-change action follow?
The Philadelphia Inquirer
May 5, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: CURRENTS; Pg. C3
Length: 449 words
Byline: Mark Alan Hughes
Body


ABSTRACT
The idea: The longer the remaining life expectancy, the more weight a vote would have. Could climate-change action follow?
We should weight every vote by the voter's remaining life expectancy. Such a move would align power over decisions with the decider's expected number of years living with the consequences of those decisions.
How would it work? National average life expectancy would be calculated for every birth year. The longer the remaining life expectancy, the more weight voters would have. Every voter in the same birth year would have an equally weighted vote. And birth years with longer remaining life expectancy would have more weighted votes than birth years with shorter remaining life expectancy. Because everyone with the same remaining life expectancy would have the same weight to their vote, the principle here could be called "one future, one vote."
On average women live longer than men, as do whites than blacks. And yes, if the weighted voting was based solely on birth year, with no adjustments for sex or race or anything else, then voters from groups with lower than average life expectancies (men, blacks, the poor) would get a higher weighting relative to voters of the same age from groups with higher than average life expectancies (women, whites, the rich). Since the former groups currently vote at lower rates, the rule might actually help overcome existing inequalities by incentivizing these groups to vote.
Note that a voter's first vote would always be their most impactful, which might create positive incentives for both learning and voting. The diminishing impact of a voter's vote over time would create a sense of scarcity and an expected boost in the voter's participation in the present. Because this would be as true for a 20-year-old voter as it would for a 40-year-old voter, the rule might lead to universal increase in voting over time with a resulting increase in the impact of wisdom from experience.
It is well understood that all humans, no matter their age, have a strong tendency to over-value the present compared with the future. This bias, probably more than any other single reason, is why we are doomed on climate change. Sure, greed and power and distraction and complexity make climate policy difficult. But perhaps the single biggest obstacle on our path to averting extinction is that the future has too weak a constituency.
We humans are not likely to overcome our biases, but we can design a democratic process that privileges the votes of those expected to spend the most time in the future.
Mark Alan Hughes, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania, was founding director of sustainability for the City of
Philadelphia.

Load-Date: May 5, 2019


End of Documen
t



Letters: Debatable questions - Clinton's climate-change plan, Trump's taxes
The Philadelphia Inquirer
October 2, 2016 Sunday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2016 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; P-com Opinion; Pg. C05
Length: 774 words
Body


ISSUE | CAMPAIGN 2016
Will climate-change plan work?In the first presidential debate ("Showdown," Tuesday), Hillary Clinton showed she was prepared to lead strongly on college education, affordable day care, equal pay, criminal justice reform, and the threat of nuclear weapons. Donald Trump had no good ideas on these key issues, focusing on an isolationist platform on trade and questioning NATO and other alliances.
But neither candidate spent much time on the grave threat of climate change. 
Clinton did note her plan for 10 million new jobs, many in solar and wind energy, but she did not elaborate. Trump has called climate change a hoax of the Chinese, to steal our jobs - one more conspiracy. The public needs to know how Clinton's program would work.
We also need to get more information out. For example, the United States has just agreed to work out a new agreement with more than 100 countries to reduce hydrofluorocarbons used in refrigeration. HFCs do more to heat up the Earth, by volume, than the main greenhouse gas we hear about, carbon dioxide.
The technology is there, and Clinton needs to endorse this agreement. 
|Edward A. Aguilar, director, Pennsylvania chapter, Coalition for Peace Action, Philadelphia
Clinton resorted to a low blowHillary Clinton reached into her dirty bag in Monday's debate and referenced Donald Trump's verbal attacks against women. Trump, because Clinton's family was in the audience - as was his family - gave her a pass on President Bill Clinton's history with women, including a congressional impeachment involving intern Monica Lewinsky, and the payoff of Paula Jones. The Democrats and their candidate showed a complete lack of class.
|Alan Cribb, Tucker, Ga.
Paying taxes is our civic dutyIn Monday's debate, Donald Trump quipped that he was "smart" by not paying federal taxes. If he would release his tax returns, we would know whether he has ever paid taxes.
Taxes pay for public services such as education, roads, veterans' services, and countless other vital services that help keep Philadelphia moving forward. 
The thousands of workers we represent in 
AFSCME District Councils 33, 47, and 1199C are committed to keeping our children safe, our streets clean, our prisons secure, our drinking water clean, and our patients healthy. Because we are charged with improving the common good - using tax dollars wisely and conservatively - we are in the unique situation to understand the importance of taxes.
Failing to pay taxes hits every citizen in the pocketbook. Not paying taxes is not smart; it is irresponsible and unpatriotic. The taxes we all pay keep America great.
|Pete Matthews, AFSCME D.C. 33; Fred Wright, AFSCME D.C. 47; and Henry Nicholas, National Union of Hospital and Health Care Employees, Philadelphia
No doubt who won the debateI was dismayed by the headline of Tuesday's editorial, "Debatable outcome." Did you really hear Donald Trump's responses on cyber security and his tax returns and believe there is any doubt who won the debate? The real obstacles to having a meaningful debate were not the questions or the format, but Trump's lack of knowledge or ability. He was uninformed, self-absorbed, and erratic. There was nothing about his performance that showed he is qualified to be president. Hillary Clinton won the debate, plain and simple.
|Dianne Manning, Philadelphia
'Foul' on convention funding As a registered Democrat, I was appalled that the Philadelphia 2016 Host Committee raised
$85 million to pay for the Democratic National Convention here ("DNC host body lists donors to convention," Wednesday). More disturbing than that bloated amount is that Pennsylvania taxpayers were the largest "donors," through a $10 million grant from the state Department of Community and Economic Development.
The department's mission is to "foster opportunities for businesses to grow and for communities to succeed and thrive in a global economy . . . while assuring transparency and accountability in the expenditure of public funds."
I could find nothing on its website about this grant and how it fostered businesses to grow or Philadelphia to succeed. Where is the transparency?
|Jay Cohen, Flourtown
The largest donor to the Democratic National Convention was the Pennsylvania taxpayer. This is outrageous. Since when should Republicans and independents donate to a different partisan political party? If rich Democrats want to buy a politician, it's their money, but Pennsylvania taxpayers were not given any say about spending $10 million on the Democratic convention. And what will the party do with the surplus - will taxpayers see any of it?
|Karl H. Zimmerman, Catawissa, Pa.

Graphic

 
PATRICK SEMANSKY / Associated Press

Load-Date: October 2, 2016


End of Documen
t



Pa. senator takes heat after blaming 'warm bodies' for climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 31, 2017 Friday, WEB Edition


Copyright 2017 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: WEB; P-com News Politics; Pg. WEB
Length: 296 words
Byline: Karen Langley
Body


HARRISBURG — Does Scott Wagner, the Republican state senator and gubernatorial candidate, really think that the warmth of human bodies and movement of the planet are behind climate change?
His campaign manager, Jason High, said Thursday that Wagner, a York County businessman, doesn't know what causes global warming — that was "kind of the point" of remarks Wagner gave to an interviewer this week that are now rippling in political circles.
"He's not running to be the top scientist in the state," High said. "He's running for governor."
Talking about climate change, Wagner on Monday told WITF radio in Harrisburg: ";I haven't been in a science class in a long time, but the Earth moves closer to the sun every year — you know the rotation of the Earth. ... We're moving closer to the sun.";
";We have more people," he continued. "You know, humans have warm bodies. So is heat coming off?";
The comments have since sparked criticism and ridicule. In a story in the York Daily Record, a lecturer at the Hayden Planetarium in New York called Wagner's remarks "total, utter nonsense."
The Pennsylvania Democratic Party emailed out a list of headlines about the interview, such as this one from the Huffington Post: "Badly Misinformed Lawmaker Thinks Our ‘Warm Bodies' May Be Causing Climate Change."
"Scott Wagner's inability to understand or accept basic science is reflective of too much time spent in Harrisburg rubbing elbows with special interests," state party executive director Sinceré Harris said in a statement.
Wagner's campaign manager said Thursday that the senator does believe people should be "responsible stewards of the environment." But the candidate "gets very concerned about over-regulation, things that impede development," High said. 

Graphic

 
Photograph by: File photo

Load-Date: March 31, 2017


End of Documen
t



A primer on climate change by Al Gore
The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 3, 2009 Tuesday, CITY-C Edition


Copyright 2009 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Inq World & Nation; Pg. A09
Length: 1146 words
Byline: By Sandy Bauers

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


Al Gore admits it won't be easy.
His critics are loud. And painful as it is, he has to contemplate that we might not "find the moral courage" to solve global warming, which he calls the foremost planetary crisis before us.
But because he's optimistic, he's giving us a road map for how to address it. Due in bookstores today, it's called Our Choice: A Plan to Solve the Climate Crisis.
Gore wants to retrofit not just our buildings and our political policies, but also our very culture, changing the way we avoid thinking about climate change because it seems too abstract.
Rather than a checklist, it's an all-of-the-above primer on everything from renewable energy to forest conservation to building a smarter grid. Not to mention the need to develop the political will.
"We need changes in laws and policies in order to accelerate reduction in global-warming pollution," he said in a recent interview with The Inquirer. 
On Friday, Gore will be at the Loews Philadelphia Hotel, speaking at a national conference on critical security issues in the 21st century sponsored by the World Affairs Council.
His critics have long called some of his ideas impractical and said they would hurt the economy. 
Gore takes his critics on, even picturing some of them in the book and attributing their views to "political bias."
The 416-page paperback from Rodale Books, of Emmaus, Pa., is a sequel to An Inconvenient Truth. 
It resembles a cross between a textbook and a coffee-table book, a Ken-Burns-meets-global-warming, with vivid diagrams of how technologies work and lavish color photos. It lists at $26.99.
Gore cites environmental exhortations from the Bible, the Quran, and the Torah and lambastes corporate carbon polluters for "lavishly financed" campaigns of "intentional deception" that he says have "poisoned" the integrity of the nation's democracy.
The book comes just a month before the world's leaders meet in Copenhagen, Denmark, to establish a climate agreement.
Gore, who recently met unofficially with climate-policy leaders in China, South Africa, and Egypt, plans to be in Copenhagen for the talks, an aide said. Gore is registered through his nonprofit, the Alliance for Climate Protection, which gives him "observer" status. (The proceeds from his book are being donated to the organization.) 
"The airwaves will be jammed leading up to Copenhagen, and he'll have the biggest microphone," said Timothy E. Wirth, president of the nonprofit United Nations Foundation and a former Democratic senator from Colorado. 
From China to Europe, climate change "is all people talk about," Wirth said. "Here, it's like people whistling past the graveyard."
Andrew Light, an analyst with the Center for American Progress, a liberal think tank, also believes Gore will be a major presence in Copenhagen.
Two years ago, Gore all but single-handedly saved climate talks in Indonesia from collapsing when he flew to Bali and persuaded some delegates not to walk out of the meeting in protest over the position the Bush administration was taking, Light said.
Even some who disagree with Gore's recommendations respect his voice. 
"The bottom line is, Al Gore is a large and present voice in this debate, and he will continue to be that," said Frank Maisano, energy specialist at Bracewell & Giuliani L.L.P., an international law firm that represents utilities, refiners, and wind developers.
"In fact, he's a larger figure in the debate now than he ever would have been as the president. He has the ability to say what he thinks, rather than having constituencies to go back to."
However, Maisano said Gore's support for both a carbon tax and a cap-and-trade program - which he has testified about and reiterates in the book - will go nowhere. 
"It's a double hit on the economy," Maisano said. It might reduce atmospheric concentrations to where they need to be, he said, "but the political reality of doing that is probably zero."
The book has a first printing of 400,000 copies. It is, of course, carbon-neutral and printed on 100 percent recycled paper. But that's not all. Gore uses nearly an entire page to describe the other eco-choices made in producing the book.
The book is launching the former vice president on a blitz of appearances.
On television alone, he was on the CBS Evening News last night and is scheduled for Good Morning America and the Late Show With David Letterman today. Then it's on to Jon Stewart tomorrow and Larry King next week.
A common thread Our Choice stems, in part, from more than 30 "Solutions Summits" Gore hosted, involving experts in various fields. 
A common thread is that the world has to put an appropriate price on carbon. He says the world's inability to recognize carbon's true cost is a brewing crisis that resembles subprime mortgages. 
The book has a companion Web site, www.ourchoicethebook.com, that includes an evolving "Solutions Wiki," where both experts and everyday citizens can weigh in.
Among an onslaught of other pre-Copenhagen books, Gore's stands out for its readability, said Joseph Romm, who blogs on climate matters for the Center for American Progress Action Fund, and who got an advance peek.
"It is a very broad-based primer on the solutions," Romm said. "I don't know of a comparable book out there." 
He praised Gore for tackling complex issues like nuclear power, concentrated thermal power, and even biochar - a carbon-capturing soil additive that is a new buzzword in environmental circles.
"Things in this book that aren't well-known, over the next 10 to 15 years they are going to be things any educated person is going to need to be knowledgeable about and have an opinion about."
The book is not without some bite. 
Senate action On the first page of the chapter titled "Political Obstacles" is a photo of Saudi King Abdullah embracing George W. Bush.
Gore humorously refers to himself as "a recovering politician," but in a recent interview he said he'd always been forthright. "What has changed is the science," he said. It is now more clear than ever, he said, that action needs to be taken.
If the Senate can pass meaningful climate and energy legislation before Copenhagen, he said, "President Obama will be able to negotiate on behalf of our country with the authority he needs to help get a meaningful treaty."
Gore writes in the last chapter that, at its most basic, the nation has two choices: Solve the problem or not.
He envisions two letters to future generations. One, an apology, answers the question, "Did you not care?"
The other: "How did you find the moral courage to rise up and solve a crisis so many said was impossible?"
"The choice is awesome and potentially eternal," he writes. "It is in the hands of the present generation: a decision we cannot escape, and a choice to be mourned or celebrated through all the generations that follow."
Contact staff writer Sandy Bauers at 215-854-5147 or sbauers@phillynews.com.  

Graphic

 
Feed Loader

Load-Date: November 3, 2009


End of Documen
t



Study shows climate changes transform Arctic region
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 11, 2009 Friday, CITY-C Edition


Copyright 2009 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Inq World & Nation; Pg. A03
Length: 625 words
Byline: By Faye Flam

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


The most comprehensive study to date of conditions in the Arctic shows that climate change has already transformed landscapes and ecosystems through Siberia, northern Canada, Alaska, Greenland, and other far northern regions. 
"The Arctic as we know it may soon be a thing of the past," said Eric Post, a biologist at Pennsylvania State University and the leader of the large, international team that put together the study, published in today's issue of the journal Science.
In his 20 years of fieldwork in Greenland, Post said he's seen wild rhododendrons explode across the tundra, and once-abundant herds of caribou thinning to half their previous ranks. On average, the Arctic has warmed by about 1 degree Celsius in the last few decades, and about 20 percent of the vast sheets of sea ice has melted. 
While that has been known for some time, the new paper catalogs the ecological changes that have resulted. 
"We're all extremely familiar with our own areas of research, but no one has had an area-wide perspective before," said Post, who was lead author on the paper. "When it's all put together, it shows how broad the changes are: plants, birds, mammals, ice and land - it's all changing everywhere." 
Post has been concentrating on caribou, which he says are suffering from progressively earlier springs. 
Their migration patterns used to take them to places where calves could eat fresh green shoots, he said, but now, with seasonal changes shifted, the young calves are faced with tough summer shrubs. 
In addition, plants that the caribou need are crowded out by rhododendrons that have crept in with increasing heat and humidity. 
Most scientists agree that carbon dioxide buildup is warming the whole planet, but it is happening two to three times faster in the Arctic. One reason is that warming in the Arctic melts snow and ice, exposing darker areas of land and decreasing the amount of sunlight being reflected away. That creates a feedback loop that can accelerate warming, said F. Stuart Chapin, an expert on Arctic ecology at the University of Alaska. 
And loss of sun-reflecting ice can accelerate warming in lower latitudes as well, he said. The Arctic absorbs heat from other parts of the globe, acting as "the world's air conditioner." 
Chapin, who does fieldwork in Alaska and Siberia, said he had seen more wildfires and a steady thawing of the permafrost, leading to more thaw ponds. Some of those release methane - a greenhouse gas - into the atmosphere. 
"One of the things that's important about that article is showing how systematic these changes are," said Chapin, who was not involved in the Science paper. "It's not one thing or another changing but the whole system changing in a way that makes future change happen even faster." 
The one positive change for Alaskans: Salmon have moved farther north. But overall, Chapin said, climate change is only going to add to an already alarming rate of extinctions. 
Worldwide, he said, "extinction rates are 100- to 1,000-fold higher than they were before the industrial revolution." Most of those species died out because they lost their habitats to human development. 
Climate change has only begun to add to this. "In my mind, we're already moving beyond extinction rates that we could consider tolerable as a society." 
Penn State's Post considers the latest round of observations a harbinger. Cutting emissions can help, but climate change will still get worse, he said, "since we've already put so much carbon in the atmosphere." 
That probably means more change in temperate latitudes too. "It's commonly said that the Arctic is the canary in the coal mine for changes that might come elsewhere," he said. 
Contact staff writer Faye Flam 
at 215-854-4977 or fflam@phillynews.com.

Load-Date: September 11, 2009


End of Documen
t



Inquirer Editorial: Climate change is real, so do something about it
The Philadelphia Inquirer
May 26, 2013 Sunday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2013 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; P-com Nav Inquirer Opinion; Pg. C04
Length: 416 words
Body


With a new study showing 97 percent of scientific papers on climate change since 1991 agree that fossil fuels are largely responsible, the doubters need to stand aside so public-policy initiatives to protect the Earth can proceed.
 There is as much heat-trapping carbon dioxide in the atmosphere now as there was in the Pliocene Age, three million years ago, when oceans were 70 feet higher and temperatures warmer. Carbon dioxide levels are 41 percent higher now than during the Industrial Revolution - and climbing. 
 The doubters, though, have done a lot of damage. By insisting climate change isn't occurring, or not caused by human use of fossil fuels and industrialization, they have reduced investments in alternative energy and slowed the progress of policies such as demanding higher vehicle gas mileage and imposing stronger emission standards on coal plants.
 Their ranting has so muddied the water that less than half of the American public knows that most scientists agree that fossil fuels cause climate change, according to a Pew Research study. They have spewed so much misinformation that politicians, including President Obama, appear afraid to call them out.
 Research by physics professor John Cook and his team of Australian and North American scholars who maintain the Skeptical Science website shows there has been scientific consensus on climate change for 20 years. But fossil fuel barons such as the Koch brothers and energy companies like Exxon have funded contradicting research to block tougher environmental regulations.
 The United States is second only to China in emitting carbon. Air pollution is so bad in China that smog has shut down the Beijing airport several times. Parents in China's cities seek schools with air purifiers because so many of their children have respiratory illnesses. The country's explosion in manufacturing jobs may have made China an economic power, but its polluting industries are making the nation sick.
 Meanwhile, superstorms in the United States have become more common, and the recovery in coastal communities more expensive. Extreme weather in the Midwest has meant deep droughts in the nation's breadbasket.
 This country and China have resisted global efforts to reduce carbon emissions. Their intransigence costs more in the long run. Just consider how much is spent on related health problems, not to mention recovery efforts after storms. The debate about what causes climate change is over. It's time to do something about it.    

Graphic

 
Museum of Natural History Rotterdam

Load-Date: May 26, 2013


End of Documen
t



Rabbis issue a letter on climate change
The Philadelphia Inquirer
June 14, 2015 Sunday, CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2015 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; P-com News Nation-World; Pg. A17
Length: 508 words
Byline: By David O'Reilly

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


When he learned in April that Pope Francis was preparing an encyclical on climate change, Rabbi Arthur Waskow was "really inspired." 
 Then the white-bearded lion of progressive Judaism asked himself, "What next?" 
 For more than three decades, Waskow, 82, has devoted himself and his Shalom Center in East Mount Airy to peace, civil rights, and the environment. That the leader of the Roman Catholic Church would speak out on what Waskow calls "global scorching" deserved, he decided, "a response from the Jewish community." 
 "We were once a people of shepherds and farmers," he explained last week. "Being close to the earth is still in our DNA." 
 What emerged was a unique, interdenominational "rabbinic letter" on global warming, coauthored by Waskow and six other rabbis, and already signed by 330 more. 
 The Shalom Center is formally releasing the letter to time with Francis' encyclical, "Laudato Si: On the Care of Our Common Home," which the Pontifical Council on Peace and Justice is expected to release Thursday in Rome.
 Titled "A Rabbinic Letter on the Climate Crisis," the 41/2-page document is addressed "To all the Jewish People, to all the Communities of Spirit, and to the World."
 "Our ancient earthy wisdom taught that social justice, sustainable abundance, a healthy Earth, and spiritual fulfillment are inseparable," it declares. "We call on the Jewish people to meet God's challenge once again." 
 It begins by invoking Psalm 148, Deuteronomy 15, and Leviticus 16, observing that "the Torah warns us that if we refuse to let the Earth rest, it will 'rest' anyway, despite us and upon us - through drought and famine and exile that turn an entire people into refugees."
 Later it trades its lyrical tone for an unabashedly liberal, pugnacious voice. 
 "Great Carbon Corporations not only make their enormous profits from wounding the Earth," it declares, "but then use these profits to purchase elections and to fund fake science to prevent the public from acting to heal the wounds." 
 It then speaks to what is also expected to be a major thrust of Francis' encyclical. "The poor . . . around the globe are the first and the worst to suffer," it says, "from the typhoons, floods, droughts, and diseases brought on by climate change." 
 After identifying modern threats to the environment - fracking, coal burning, tar sands extraction, and offshore oil drilling - the letter offers some prescriptions: greater reliance on wind and solar power, imposing "carbon fees," and relocating investments from enterprises that rely on "deadly carbon burning." 
 "We call for a new sense of eco-social justice," it declares, and invokes the great Jewish ethic of tikkun olam, Hebrew for "heal the world" to include the notion of tikkun tevel, or "heal the planet." 
 Waskow said he was not at all certain there is any precedent for an interdenominational "rabbinic letter."
 Its signers include Reform, Conservative, Reconstructionist, and a few Orthodox rabbis from across the United States, and some from Canada.
doreilly@phillynews.com
  856-779-3841

Load-Date: June 14, 2015


End of Document
