


CLIMATE CHANGE
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 20, 2020 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2020 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 15A
Length: 974 words
Byline: LORI STURDEVANT, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: If we wait any longer, it will be too late // Yet the Republican-led state Senate isn't taking the threat seriously.


Body


Something just-deposed state Commerce Commissioner Steve Kelley said in passing at a University of Minnesota event 15 months ago has stayed with me. The former DFL legislator and erstwhile candidate for U.S. Senate, governor and attorney general was forecasting the 2020 political year.
"Health care will be the big issue again, and that's a shame," Kelley said. "The next election ought to be about climate change. If we wait until 2024 to take climate change seriously, it will be too late."
What's that biblical line about a prophet lacking honor in his own country?
I've known Kelley to be a prophetic voice about the negative consequences of rising atmospheric levels of CO2 since his days in the state Senate, which ended in 2006. His brief campaign for governor in 2010 featured a call for a state tax on carbon emissions, intended to both discourage those emissions and help finance a transition to a green-energy future.
In keeping with the gospel, there was no honor in what the Republican-controlled state Senate did to Kelley on Sept. 11, when it booted him from the job at the state Commerce Department to which DFL Gov. Tim Walz appointed him 21 months ago.
No honor, that is, for the senators who showed Kelley the door. And seemingly no cognizance that on that very day, fires were consuming vast swaths of California and Oregon. Residents of Gulf-coastal Texas and Louisiana were mopping up the mess left by one major hurricane while bracing for another one. Chain saws were still buzzing in eastern Iowa after a derecho, or land hurricane, battered landscapes and flattened crops.
Each of those "natural" disasters was record-breaking, but none was entirely natural. Scientists have been warning for decades that continued high levels of human fossil-fuel consumption would lead to precisely those phenomena - and worse.
Prominent in the multipart indictment Kelley's state Senate accusers recited as they denied him confirmation was opposition to his decision last month to appeal the approval of Enbridge's proposed new pipeline across northern Minnesota.
The legal argument for the appeal Kelley approved is that Enbridge has not demonstrated that future oil consumption demand will justify a new Line 3. State law requires a forecast of demand as well as supply to justify the Public Utilities Commission's issuance of a certificate of need for any major new energy project, the appeal argues.
Its backdrop is something the line's critics have been saying for years: A state that's serious about slowing climate change ought not make it easier for highly polluting Canadian tar sands oil to be consumed.
That environmental concern went unspoken on the Senate floor before the "no" vote on Kelley's confirmation. Instead, there was much talk about the projected 4,000-plus construction jobs that would be lost if Line 3 is not replaced, and complaints that by rejecting the new line, the Walz administration was insulting Greater Minnesota.
"By doing this appeal, that's thumbing their nose at rural Minnesota," accused Sen. Mark Johnson, R-East Grand Forks. "Does that just tell us that we are a bunch of rocks and cows up there?"
One can safely assume that with an election less than two months away, both parties are well aware that Greater Minnesota is populated by voters as well as cows. But the two parties long ago reached different conclusions about the politics and economics of climate change. Kelley's non-confirmation shows that those longstanding positions are holding fast in 2020, despite the onset of hellish fire, record floods and a pandemic that has more than a few voters wondering whether American skepticism about science has gone too far.
Even outside the metro area, voters may be warming (pardon the pun) to a faster transition to green energy. Note last month's DFL primary in Duluth's state Senate District 7, in which incumbent Erik Simonson lost to attorney and political newcomer Jen McEwen. McEwen made climate change a leading issue, faulting Simonson for being part of "a small group of DFL senators who voted alongside Republicans to really stymie progress" on reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
McEwen told me that voters in her DFL-leaning district "believe in science. We believe the climate crisis is happening. We've been left feeling helpless, disempowered, in how we can move things forward. It has seemed that we were stuck. I want to change that."
So, evidently, do Duluth voters.
The now-former commissioner remained unabashedly prophetic when I caught up with him last week. Kelley predicted that regardless of who leads the state Commerce Department or whether the state is an appeal plaintiff, a new Line 3 is in for a prolonged legal challenge. Growing climate concern will propel more court action, he said.
What's more, he said, the jobs argument in favor of Enbridge's project will be increasingly be countered by awareness of the job-creating potential of green energy.
"We have options in front of us for building vastly more wind and solar power," Kelley said. "Most of that investment will be made in Greater Minnesota, both for construction and long-term operation. There will be good jobs and they'll be distributed across multiple communities. Those benefits will flow to a lot more people" than would the gains from a new pipeline, he allowed.
"Those who are painting a picture of loss" from a transition to green energy "aren't painting a complete picture. We need to tell both parts of the story."
As Kelley predicted in June 2019, a health issue - the COVID-19 threat - has taken center stage in the 2020 campaign. But nature keeps showing Americans that ignoring the climate issue won't make it go away. My prophecy: Tossing Steve Kelley out of the Walz administration won't either.
Lori Sturdevant is a retired Star Tribune editorial writer. She is at lsturdevant@startribune.com

Load-Date: September 24, 2020


End of Documen
t



READERS WRITE No 'both sides' here: The GOP plugs its ears on climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 24, 2019 Tuesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 1260 words
Body


YOUTH CLIMATE STRIKE
The welcome Star Tribune editorial on the climate crisis ("Climate Crusaders," Sept. 20) stopped short of focusing on the real problem: Republican Party intransigence in the face of overwhelming evidence of dangerous climate change. The editorial seemed to endorse Gov. Tim Walz's bill to make the state free of carbon-polluting electricity by 2050, then didn't note why the bill failed: Republican Senate leaders refused even to hold a hearing.
The editorial's exhortation that "both sides" commit to setting aside "ideology" is absurd. One side is responding to the facts of an unfolding catastrophe, while the other refuses even to hear those facts, never mind act on them. The top 10 Democrat candidates for president have agreed the climate crisis is an existential threat to life on earth. Until the Republican Party also understands and responds to that stark reality, Minnesota will fail to protect its children who bravely marched and called out loudly for action now.
James P. Lenfestey, Minneapolis
Lenfestey is a former editorial writer for the Star Tribune who covered energy and the environment, among other topics.
· · ·
How to explain the stance of the Minneapolis and St. Paul school districts regarding students' participation in the Minnesota Youth Climate Strike last Friday (" 'Kids have every right to do this,' " front page, Sept. 21)? It was as if the districts said, "You won't be able to attend after-school and homecoming activities if you choose to stand up for your future and the future of your home, your family, your school." Seriously? And Anoka-Hennepin actually sounded proud that not a single student from the largest district in the state chose to participate in the march. What are these institutions teaching these students - that it's better to be silent than stand up, better to attend the pep rally and homecoming events than witness and demand action for a healthy planet? The administrations of these schools are as complicit in our lack of action on climate change as any ill-informed and arrogant politician.
These students are the voters of tomorrow. Hopefully, since they can't express themselves during a school day, they will make it to the polls next Election Day. Before or after class, of course.
Cynthia Wetzell, Columbia Heights
· · ·
To all of the students who chose to skip school and march in protest of the lack of action on climate change, I'm sure you all had a really fun day. I was sorry to hear that the participation rate was less than 100%, because then all of you could have avoided another full day of indoctrination. I will be back at the Capitol in 12 years (that seems to be the magic number for our demise) to personally greet any of you not too embarrassed to show up. If you should choose to return, I hope that you are angry. Angry about how you have been lied to - lied to by the media, by the schools and by your parents.
To all of the parents who have chosen to frighten their children with this folly that the earth is going to end in 12 years, shame on you. Shame on you! Yes, the climate is changing, just as it always has, and always will.
S.C. Bartlett, St. Paul
· · ·
When I was the same age as many of today's protesters against climate change inaction, the world was divided into two camps: kids and grown-ups. The world of kids was complex and rife with alliances, hatreds and jealousies. The world of adults was opaque, monolithic and all-powerful. As I grew up, the adult world revealed itself to be equally complex and contradictory.
The protesters are honestly baffled by the seeming inability of all-powerful adults to prevent the obvious. They don't see the power struggles or the fact that the good guys are losing - hence the continued increase in carbon emissions despite four decades of warnings, the cyclical repeal of environmental protections, and American affection for gas-guzzling SUVs. The reasons for losing the battle include, at best, a limitless hunger for power and money, and at worst, complacency - attitudes like my SUV won't tip the balance."
I was moved by the stories and pictures of young people around the world protesting climate change. May they be enough to tip the balance.
Sheila Kelleher, St. Paul
· · ·
I admire the climate activism of our youth. It moves me to consider how I, too, can fight against global warming. Like many, I tend to think globally and become disheartened; my individual efforts seem inconsequential. Yet, I remind myself that large change often comes from many small changes, that a movement arises from individuals choosing to act. Witness the multitudes on the street Friday striking against government inaction.
We can write our politicians; we can march; we can recycle; we can drive more fuel-efficient cars; we can bike.
We can also vote with our dollars. Carbon offsets are a real thing. We do not have to wait for politicians to impose some kind of cost on the production of carbon to recognize and take responsibility for our own carbon footprint. Carbon offsets can be purchased, and I encourage people to do so.
Craig Peterson, Minneapolis
· · ·
Instead of punishing students for taking an interest in world and national events that affect them, school districts could have made student climate strikes an educational moment by having students submit papers about the protests, the science behind the concern or other topics that relate directly to these protests. Our young people know that the lack of response worldwide will affect them far more than it will affect those of us who are old. They are right when they say we have failed them. Nothing could be more urgent than to save our planet. It's the only one we have.
AnnLiv Bacon, Edina
MPLS. 2040 PLAN
Well-calculated rezoning can work. But the sweeping 2040 Plan won't
A Prospect Park community leader wrote on Saturday about how his community has evolved over time to accept a mixture of single-family homes with multiunit dwellings ("Increase density, built community," Readers Write, Sept. 21). He did not mention that it was all done under current residential zoning laws, which will be totally obliterated under the Minneapolis 2040 Plan.
There's night-and-day difference between the well-calculated property-by-property rezonings that Prospect Park experienced vs. the 2040 Plan, which upzones every home and duplex in Minneapolis in every neighborhood in one fell swoop.
Under the plan, all single-family homes and duplexes everywhere will be upzoned to at least triplex status. Zoning on busy streets will be boosted to allow apartment buildings at least three stories high. Residential properties across the alleys of busy streets will be upzoned to at least 2.5-story apartment buildings. Residences in more congested area will be upzoned to allow four- to 10-story buildings.
One more thing: Off-street parking will not be required.
Minneapolis is the best big city in America. Its strength is based on the hardworking people who tend their modest-but-charming homes typically situated on narrow lots that are a fraction of the size of most of their suburban neighbors. We are second only to Salt Lake City in millennial homeownership. I'm aghast that the mayor and City Council want to make it so simple and easy for speculators to "flip" our neighborhoods but so difficult for the highly taxed and deeply rooted homeowners who have made Minneapolis the envy of the country.
Say "no" to risky citywide upzoning and keep our current zoning laws. They worked in Prospect Park.
Wes Skoglund, Minneapolis
We want to hear from you. Send us a note here.

Load-Date: December 4, 2019


End of Documen
t



Climate change boosts some yields
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 11, 2019 Thursday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D
Length: 476 words
Byline: ADAM BELZ; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Warmer, wetter means higher soybean and corn yields in Minnesota.


Body


The uneven impact of climate change is actually helping corn and soybean farmers in the Upper Midwest.
Higher temperatures and heavier precipitation have increased yields for corn and soybeans in much of Minnesota, Iowa and the Dakotas, according to a statistical analysis conducted at the University of Minnesota. The study highlights the disparate effects of climate change, even within a region.
Soybean yields have improved in the Western Hemisphere and North Africa thanks to the changing climate, but have suffered in Eastern Europe. Even as corn harvests have benefited in Minnesota, they have suffered in Illinois, Indiana and Ohio.
Corn yields in Minnesota are up 2.8% and soybean yields are up 8% based on the study's models, said Deepak Ray, a researcher at the Institute on the Environment at the U and lead author of the study.
"It was totally a surprise," Ray said. "I was expecting there would be winners and losers, but I was expecting the Upper Midwest to be a loser."
The study's authors, who controlled for improved farm technology and management, built a data set of yields for 10 major crops and weather over decades across the globe to figure out what effect the changing climate has had.
In much of the world, the effect has been negative. Global palm oil, barley, rice and wheat yields have fallen. Soybean yields in Western Europe have dropped 22% and corn yields in Eastern and Northern Europe have dropped by 25% as a result of climate change, according to the study.
Global corn yields have held steady despite the declines in Europe, thanks to improving conditions in South America, but soybeans have been a big winner across the world. Global soybean yields are up 3.5% as a result of a climate change, the study said. Much of that benefit falls to farmers in the Upper Midwest.
Sorghum, which in the U.S. is mostly grown in Great Plains states, has also enjoyed increased yields thanks to climate change, the study said.
Wheat yields have suffered in the Upper Midwest compared to a hypothetically cooler climate, but the crop has been overtaken by corn and soybeans in much of Minnesota, so the negative effects aren't widely felt.
"If you look at wheat for Minnesota, you see a negative effect, but wheat is not as important," Ray said. "For corn and soybeans it has been great."
Whether the changes to the climate will continue to benefit farmers in Minnesota and Iowa is another question, Ray said.
"At present we are sitting in a very nice climatic condition," he said. "I don't know if that will change."
Adam Belz · 612-673-4405 Twitter: @adambelz
Corn and soybean yields as a result of climate change
Based on a study model that was led by researcher Deepak Ray at the U's Institute on the Environment
+2.8%
Corn yield
in Minnesota
+8%
Soybean yield
in Minnesota
-25%
Corn yield in Eastern and Northern Europe
- 22%
Soybean yield
in Western Europe

Load-Date: July 11, 2019


End of Documen
t



Getting real about a warmer, wetter Minnesota; Instead of debating climate change, public planners at a summit this week are envisioning the effects of more heat, rain and how to adapt. Planners at a summit this week are already envisioning the effects of climate change and how to live with them.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 16, 2010 Thursday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2010 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1219 words
Byline: BILL McAULIFFE; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


It might be hard to imagine a Minnesota where the big fishing day is the bass opener. Or where the pine forest has given way to maple woods. Or where summer heat -- not blizzards -- is the dominant weather threat.
But public planners are already beginning to sketch out a future like that. Thursday they'll gather for a two-day conference at the Minnesota Landscape Arboretum to swap ideas not on how to slow or reverse climate change, but how to live with it.
The Clean Water and Climate Adaptation Summit will bring together national climate researchers and public officials in an effort to move the discussion about climate change from experts and advocates to hard-hatted public works managers.
"For a very long time, 'adaptation' was a four-letter word," said Eileen Shea, chief of the climate services division for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and one of the keynote speakers at the conference. "Some scientists and environmentalists felt that talking about adaptation was an admission of defeat. But in a way we've become a little more realistic. We have to accept the fact that communities and natural resources are going to be subject to the impacts of climate change for the next 50 or 100 years."
Said Julie Westerlund, education and communications manager for the Minnehaha Creek Watershed District, one of the conference sponsors: "To some degree, climate change is here to stay, so we have to ask, 'What are we going to do to make our environments more livable?'"
Because one of the key expected effects of a warmer climate in Minnesota will be more intense rainfall (as well as drought), water will be central to the conference agenda.
But it will also touch on heat wave response, fisheries and parks management, and the quest to develop climate models that put a local spin on global warming.
One example: Chicago
Climate research has already shown a steep increase in the percentage of annual precipitation that comes from thunderstorms, said University of Minnesota Extension climatologist, author and commentator Mark Seeley.
That knowledge helped shape plans for a $1.5 billion flood-mitigation diversion along the Red River of the North around Fargo and Moorhead.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers based the plans on rainfall trends going back only as far as 1942, because using figures from the drier decades before that might have left Fargo and Moorhead still vulnerable in an increasingly wet era, said Pat Foley, a principal planner on the diversion.
Does the expected increase in rain and possibly snow mean more cities should be installing bigger sewer pipes or more holding ponds or other absorbent landscapes?
Chicago thinks so. It's been revamping its public works to accommodate those anticipated climate changes, "having a degree of belief in climate change predictions," according to Peter Mulvaney, assistant commissioner of the Department of Water Management and one of the presenters at the conference.
Smaller street-level stormwater interceptors built over the past five years will slow down the flow of stormwater into main sewers, reducing the risk of backup into people's basements, Mulvaney said. Across the city, 7 million square feet of green roofs, the most in the country, will also serve to slow down stormwater runoff.
The city is also getting emergency and social service agencies to coordinate during heat waves to avoid a repeat of 1995. About 700 people died during a heat wave that summer in part, Mulvaney said, because hospitals, community agencies and emergency responders hadn't thought to work together.
Designated public cooling areas, from air-conditioned spaces to strategically placed water misters, are also being established, Mulvaney said.
Those measures were already under consideration before anyone was casting them as an adaptation to long-term climate warming, Mulvaney noted. And there's been criticism.
Slowing down stormwater has cost "tens of millions" while leaving pools of stormwater in the streets longer. So the city has had to include public relations and education programs in its climate program. Nevertheless, each strategy was an example of "a no-regrets decision," Mulvaney said. "It's good either way."
Not in the ground yet
The Twin Cities and the Minnesota Department of Health drew up an emergency heat response program several years ago, based on Chicago's experience. More recently, Minneapolis has incorporated "mini-reservoirs" into rebuilt streets, where rainwater from relatively gentle storms can be used by trees or held in the soil. St. Paul is planning a similar strategy as part of the Central Corridor light-rail project.
But adaptation work in Minnesota appears to be in the early stages and focused on changing management strategies and thinking.
The Health Department, eyeing the potential spread of disease from floods and from the expanding ranges of some insects, notably ticks, just completed a strategic plan to coordinate with local health departments.
Concerned that heat waves might also threaten the elderly and asthmatics, it's also developing a "heat vulnerability index" tailored for Minnesota, project consultant Kristin Raab said.
That might include mapping where vulnerable people might live, identifying homes and apartments built before air conditioning became common, she said.
At the DNR, fisheries research and policy manager Don Pereira said managers will have to begin to think about tough choices and public expectations.
It might have to try to preserve traditional fish species, such as walleye, in lakes where the fish aren't reproducing as well or have lost a food source to warmth, invasive species or both, he said.
Even polar explorer Will Steger, an enduring advocate for reversing the human contribution to global warming, recently acknowledged that people may have to accept an altered world for plants, animals, people and wilderness.
"Some of this is not going to be reversed," he said. "I'm afraid we're going to have to adapt."
But it's tricky to know exactly what's coming, much less to plan for it.
"We currently manage for the present," said Deb Swackhamer, director of the University of Minnesota's Water Resources Center. Climate predictions still need to improve, she said, but an equivalent challenge is getting policymakers, politicians and even homeowners to think long term.
"People talk about climate change as the biggest crisis to face mankind, but it's a crisis that's occurring in slow motion," she said. "It's difficult to convey the fact that action must be taken. But if you start to actually take action where you can, even if it's adaptation and not remediation, I think that empowers people."
Bill McAuliffe - 612-673-7646
CLEAN WATER AND CLIMATE ADAPTATIOn Summit
When: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. Thursday, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Friday.
Where: Minnesota Landscape Arboretum. Hwy. 5, Chanhassen.
Key feature: 18th annual Kuehnast Lecture, 7 p.m. Thursday. Free.
"Strengths and Weaknesses of Different Climate Models," Dr. Ben Santer, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. "Climate Services for Society: Challenges and Opportunities," Dr. Eileen Shea, chief of climate services division, National Climatic Data Center, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
To register, call 952-443-1422.
Note: Full summit admission is $60. For a full agenda, go to www.bit.ly/atLcnS.

Load-Date: September 16, 2010


End of Documen
t



More evidence of climate-change toll
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
August 13, 2017 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2017 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2OP
Length: 539 words
Body


A draft of the latest National Climate Assessment is out, and the findings are sobering. The work of more than 400 scientists, thousands of studies, and data drawn from 60 nations shows beyond any reasonable doubt that human-driven climate change is an inescapable fact.
The findings show that humans are changing the climate - dramatically. Recent decades are the warmest in the last 1,500 years. In what should be a warning to all, scientists from most major federal agencies said that "[e]vidence of a changing climate abounds, from the top of the atmosphere to the depths of the oceans .... Many lines of evidence demonstrate that human activities, especially emissions of greenhouse gases, are primarily responsible for observed climate change."
The report comes against the backdrop of a president who has vociferously opposed even the idea of climate change, calling it at one point a hoax foisted upon the world by the Chinese. Needless to say, President Donald Trump never offered support for that extraordinary claim, but he nevertheless made good on his threat to begin extricating the U.S. from the Paris climate accord, a landmark agreement among major nations.
The new climate assessment should serve notice that the time for such political shenanigans is over. Minnesotans know this even more acutely than the rest of the country. According to University of Minnesota climatologist Mark Seeley, for a variety of reasons this state has been hit exceptionally hard by climate change in a way that longtime Minnesotans have been able to observe during their lifetimes. Winters are milder. Spring comes earlier, and summers are warmer and wetter.
Last year was record-setting for the amount of precipitation in Minnesota. Some may think that doesn't sound too bad. But the implications of climate change are far-reaching. Native fish that prefer cooler lakes are vanishing. Aspen trees, with their shimmering leaves, are dying out in places. Weather events are more extreme, causing more damage. Populations of ticks and other parasites are growing - with all the public health implications that carries - and allergy season here is longer than ever.
Seeley, who has tracked the changes for 40 years, told an editorial writer that the rate is accelerating at too rapid a clip to be attributed to anything other than human intervention. "It's not random. It's not natural," he said. " ... The pace of change is remarkable, whether it's in a 100-, 1,000- or 10,000-year context."
Seeley has little hope that the report, dire as it is, will ring the alarm bells needed to wake the Trump administration from its denial. "But I've always believed in tackling this issue from the bottom up," he said.
And that is where Minnesotans should take heart. Change can be made at the town, city, county and state levels. Minnesota, a national leader on reducing emissions, knows how to do this. Reject the fatalist, blinkered approach that refuses to acknowledge human responsibility and the need to mitigate the damage that has been done.
This planet is home. There is no other. Doubters should read the facts for themselves, then demand that their elected representatives do the stop swallowing the easy fiction that tells them they need not worry.

Load-Date: August 14, 2017


End of Documen
t



Climate change is real in Minnesota, too
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 13, 2018 Thursday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2018 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10A
Length: 592 words
Body


Minnesotans have reveled this week in some of the best weather of the year with a watchful eye to the nation's mid-Atlantic seaboard. If, as expected, Hurricane Florence makes landfall Thursday night at a vicious Category 3 level or greater, devastating damage is sure to result.
As is their wont, Minnesotans will respond with sympathy, donations and volunteer labor - and a touch of smugness. Minnesota didn't make a recent list of the nation's 25 most disaster-prone states, compiled by moneywise.com. This landlocked state is spared hurricanes. The risk of volcanoes and earthquakes is exceedingly low. Even tornadoes, which Minnesotans know and respect, are less frequent than in several other Midwestern states.
But Minnesotans should know this: The same climatological phenomenon that is adding potency to Florence this year and made hurricanes Harvey, Inez and Maria record-breakers last year is affecting this state, too. Climate change is making Minnesota a wetter place.
Just as higher Atlantic Ocean surface temperatures are fueling Florence's intensity, so higher temperatures in Minnesota are leading to more precipitation. The 30-year averages that produce what meteorologists deem "normal" precipitation levels have been climbing steadily throughout the state for a half-century, reports University of Minnesota emeritus professor and climatologist Mark Seeley. They are expected to keep climbing.
Already in the Twin Cities, normal annual precipitation has increased 20 percent, up from 25.93 inches in 1941-70 to 31.16 inches in 1981-2010. Seeley expects another boost when the next 30-year average is calculated in 2020, and another in 2030. In Greater Minnesota, precipitation levels are also up but in varying degrees, with the heavily agricultural counties of south-central Minnesota seeing increases in the 30-35 percent range, Seeley told an editorial writer.
Climate change also explains the increased frequency of heavy storms, of the sort that produce flash flooding, washed-out crop fields, costly structural damage and risk to human life and health. The latest example: an Aug. 27-28 storm so severe that it destroyed a scenic waterfall in Hokah, in far southeastern Minnesota.
To the credit of state lawmakers, state assistance when such storms strike is not in doubt. The 2014 Legislature and Gov. Mark Dayton established a contingency account that the governor can tap to pay the state's share of recovery costs when storm damage exceeds requisite thresholds.
Local and regional governments have also been planning for a wetter Minnesota. The Metropolitan Council's Climate Vulnerability Assessment is an aid to local planning, and it has utility well beyond the Twin Cities area. The University of Minnesota hosts an annual climate adaptation conference for local officials and others charged with community responses to the changing climate; the next such meeting is set for Nov. 14.
These are commendable first steps at the start of what Minnesotans should see as a long journey that they cannot avoid taking. It's long past time to discard mistaken notions that climate change only matters to polar bears, penguins and seacoast dwellers. It matters here, too - and how Minnesotans respond will matter for years to come.
(One fine way to learn more about climate change: Attend Seeley's lecture "Climate Change in Our Own Backyards: Evidence and Implications," on Oct. 4. It's part of the University of Minnesota College of Continuing Education's Headliner series, and tickets are required - https://ccaps.umn.edu/headliners.)

Load-Date: September 13, 2018


End of Documen
t



Climate-change debate sinks to name-calling, legal threats; A St. Thomas professor's response to a British climate change skeptic has bloggers and others all fired up.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 23, 2010 Friday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2010 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 876 words
Byline: BILL McAULIFFE; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


A University of St. Thomas professor's online rebuttal to a well-known British climate change skeptic has touched off a cyberspace heat storm and activated the university's legal team.
In nearly half a million Google items (as of Thursday), Prof. John Abraham has been alternately praised as a long-needed factual voice on climate change and vilified for attacking Lord Christopher Monckton, a journalist, classics scholar, politician and hereditary peer also known as 3rd Viscount Monckton of Brenchley. Monckton's critique of climate change science led him to testify before the U.S. Congress.
For his part, Monckton has fired back in a YouTube interview clip, calling Abraham "a wretched little man," the University of St. Thomas "a half-assed Catholic bible college," and its president, the Rev. Dennis Dease, "a creep."
St. Thomas officials have defended Abraham's efforts, and the school's lawyers have gone beyond that. In a letter to Monckton, St. Thomas attorney Phyllis Karasov threatened legal action if Monckton does not "immediately cease and desist making any further disparaging or defamatory comments about the University of St. Thomas, President Father Dease, Professor Abraham, the Archdioceses of Saint Paul and Minneapolis, or anyone else associated with the University."
"Safe to say it's been a daily activity for the past two months," Abraham said of dealing with the reaction to the online confrontation with Lord Monckton.
It began with Bethel speech
The back-and-forth began with Monckton's October appearance at Bethel University in Arden Hills, sponsored by the Minnesota Free Market Institute, a nonpartisan group advocating limited government and market competition.
In his 90-minute talk, Monckton, dressed in a three-piece suit and dropping Latin phrases ad infinitum, criticized much of climate change research as "pseudo-scientific gibberish" and warned that environmentalists from former Eastern Bloc countries are about to establish a Communist world government.
"There is no problem with the climate," he said. "The scare is over."
Abraham, a professor of mechanical engineering and expert on heat transfer who has lectured on climate change, watched Monckton's talk on YouTube and decided to address what he called "misstatements." He began working in January on his own time and by March had self-produced a 126-slide, 73-minute counterpoint, asserting that Monckton had misrepresented and misunderstood research.
A fitting war for the Web
The uncappable Internet well break that followed is no surprise to Matthew Nisbet, associate professor of communications at American University in Washington, D.C., who studies political reactions to controversies in science, the environment and health.
Like evolution before it, climate change is an issue that electrifies groups on the extremes of the political spectrum, and is "a smoke screen for an underlying debate about values," Nisbet said. These days, he noted, those groups have the Internet.
"Online forums are where they can find like-minded voices, and really experience an emotional release," he said.
Nisbet said that scientists often are courted as the ultimate arbiters of controversies, but Abraham didn't seem willing to wear that mantle. While most scientists agree on the major dynamics of climate change, Abraham said, they haven't conveyed to the wider public that the outcomes are still uncertain.
"It's really too bad that the discussion of this particular issue is carried on in such a polarizing way," he said. "Scientists have to embrace the fact that there is uncertainty, yet communicate to the public about the potential impacts. It's a tough road."
Asked what he viewed as a key point of disagreement with Monckton, Abraham zeroed in on carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere, known to trap warmth. Monckton noted that the buildup from about 280 to 390 parts per million since preindustrial times is still only a small percentage of the atmosphere.
"Just because it's a small amount doesn't mean it has a small impact," Abraham said.
In the subsequent interview on the Alex Jones Channel, posted on YouTube and in a guest post on meteorologist Anthony Watts' blog, Monckton encouraged viewers to write Dease, asking him to take Abraham's post off the Web and to discipline him.
Facebook page supports prof
St. Thomas officials say Abraham's challenge has not violated any university policy.
Abraham said he has been heartened by the university's support, as well as by most of the e-mails he's received, and by a New Zealand-based Facebook petition backing his work. Many of the signers are climate researchers.
Susan Alexander, executive adviser to Dease, said e-mails to the president's office have been largely supportive of Abraham and the university.
She said the school has no plans to exploit what many online are referring to as an intellectual "smackdown" on climate change.
"We have no interest in hearing from Lord Monckton," she said.
Bill McAuliffe - 612-673-7646
GLOBAL ISSUE, LOCAL EXCHANGE
These materials are at the heart of a heated online exchange about climate change:
Lord Monckton power point:
www.tinyurl.com/yzw79j2
Monckton presentation at Bethel University:
www.tinyurl.com/yz9mom8
Prof. John Armstrong's You Tube rebuttal:
www.tinyurl.com/2w8yh9j

Load-Date: July 23, 2010


End of Documen
t



Climate change (in your back yard)
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
May 11, 2014 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2014 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2OP
Length: 876 words
Body


New national assessment challenges common ideas.
You say you don't believe in "global warming" after the winter Minnesota just endured?
Neither do we. We've sworn off using that phrase to describe the climate shifts that are increasingly evident throughout the planet, and are explainable by increases in greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. "Warming" poorly describes the cascade of weather-related adversity that has already begun, a new report says, and is very likely to continue for a century and more - particularly if humans do nothing to slow or avert it.
We'll call the unfolding transformation "climate change" for now. But even that term is too benign to convey the worrisome forecast for Midwestern states in the National Climate Assessment, released last week. "Change" sounds potentially beneficial. The trouble the assessment forecasts is not. It's more floods, drought, downpours, late-spring freezes, tornadoes, wildfires, summer humidity, insects and invasive species. It's depleted forests, reduced yields of some crops, poorer air and water quality, fewer refreshing summer nights.
It's also fewer moose, trout, walleyes and other iconic Minnesota species, the National Wildlife Federation warned in a separate report last week.
These new reports differ from their predecessors not as much in message as in immediacy. The previous two National Climate Assessments, in 2000 and 2009, spoke of changes yet to come as a result of rising greenhouse-gas quantities in the atmosphere. The new report describes events already unfolding. It calls on many Minnesotans to update their thinking about climate change, in several respects:
· Don't think that climate change is decades away. It's here, and has been for some time, the report says. For example, since 1991, the frequency of heavy rainfall events in the eight states between the Ohio River and the Great Lakes is up 37 percent compared with the 1901-1960 period. That's among the changes that climate scientists have long predicted would result from rising atmospheric carbon dioxide.
· Don't think it's someone else's problem. Minnesotans will likely be spared the direct impact of hurricanes, rising sea levels and persistent drought, though they'll pay for those disasters in higher prices for food, insurance and more. But the direct hits will be bad enough - and already have been. For example, the report notes, 11 of the 14 U.S. weather-related disasters that caused damage of more than $1 billion in 2011 affected the Midwest.
Storms are only part of the regional story, and likely not the most economically threatening. The agricultural, forestry and public-health implications of climate change are bigger worries for Minnesota. For instance, consider the consequences for the tourism industry if northern lakes sit amid grassland rather than forests, and their fish populations no longer appeal to anglers?
· Don't think it's all bad news. A longer growing season for some crops and longer ice-free shipping season on the Great Lakes are also mentioned for the Midwest in the new national assessment, even though they aren't evident this year.
Unmentioned, but much on the minds of local climate scientists and policymakers, is the potential for Minnesota to be a leader in the nation's response to climate change. That's what makes this the report's most important takeaway for Minnesotans:
· Don't think that nothing can be done locally to bend the trend lines. Minnesota already has, thanks to a series of steps by the Legislature. The state began requiring utilities to invest in wind power 20 years ago. Its goal-setting 2007 Next Generation Energy Act gave alternative energy sources another push. One marker of progress: Greenhouse-gas emissions from Minnesota-based utilities fell 13 percent between 2005 and 2010, the Pollution Control Agency reported last year.
One of the national assessment's lead authors, Rolf Nordstrom, president of the Twin Cities-based Great Plains Institute, said those steps are already putting this state ahead of others in a region that was otherwise cited in the report as a disproportionate U.S. contributor of emissions. Heavy reliance on coal to generate electricity is a prime culprit, the report says.
"The real story in this report is the upside for Minnesota," Nordstrom said. "We can be a disproportionately large share of the solution. We have the resource base and the capital here, and much of the policy framework required" to reduce consumption of fossil fuels, he said. The state is well-positioned to take advantage of wind, solar, biomass and hydro power for electricity generation. Minnesota can also be home to industries that help other states both reduce emissions and adapt to the changes that cannot be held back, he said.
For many Minnesotans, doubt and denial about climate change have given way to acceptance. But that ought not lead to resignation or despair. Rather, more Minnesotans should catch the vision Nordstrom describes, and resolve to make it real.
Heating up in Hibbing
A New York Times account about the National Climate Assessment cited Hibbing, Minn., as among the U.S. cities with the biggest increase in average annual temperatures during 1991-2012, compared with 1901-1960. The increase: 3.1 degrees Fahrenheit.

Load-Date: May 13, 2014


End of Documen
t



State sues oil firms over climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
June 25, 2020 Thursday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2020 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D
Length: 769 words
Byline: MIKE HUGHLETT; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: AG Keith Ellison alleges consumer fraud, deceptive practices and false advertising.


Body


Minnesota Attorney General Keith Ellison on Wednesday sued ExxonMobil Corp., Koch Industries and the American Petroleum Institute, saying they have long deceived consumers over the effects of climate change.
The lawsuit, filed in Ramsey County District Court, includes claims of multiple violations of Minnesota laws, including fraud, deceptive trade practices and false statements in advertising.
"The defendants deceived, lied and misrepresented the effects of their product to the public," Ellison said at a news conference. "For 30 years, [they] made misleading statements about climate change."
The lawsuit seeks restitution for the alleged harms Minnesotans have suffered and also asks the defendants to fund a public-education campaign on climate change.
ExxonMobil said the Minnesota lawsuit was a "politically motivated campaign" against energy companies.
"Legal proceedings like this waste millions of dollars of taxpayer money and do nothing to advance meaningful actions that reduce the risks of climate change," the company said in a statement.
Wichita, Kan.-based Koch Industries owns the Pine Bend oil refinery in Rosemount through its subsidiary Flint Hills Resources.
Flint Hills, also named as a defendant, said it is reviewing the state's lawsuit. Pine Bend, which employs more than 1,000 people, is one of the largest refineries in the Midwest and makes the majority of gasoline used in Minnesota.
The American Petroleum Institute, a trade group, said in a statement that over the past 20 years the industry has provided "affordable, reliable American energy to U.S. consumers while substantially reducing emissions and our environmental footprint. Any suggestion to the contrary is false."
Ellison, asked for a dollar amount on damages he was seeking, said "it's going to be a lot." Asked if that number could be in the ballpark of the state's $7 billion settlement in 1998 with the tobacco industry, he said it "certainly could be."
The lawsuit is part of a wave of litigation aimed at oil companies for climate-change effects. At least 15 other plaintiffs - including the states of Massachusetts and Rhode Island, as well as cities and counties - have filed such lawsuits. None has resulted in a decision against oil companies.
Leigh Currie, an assistant attorney general, said Minnesota's lawsuit is most akin to a suit filed last year by the state of Massachusetts, which also alleged violation of consumer protection statutes.
Currie said the Minnesota suit is the first to name Koch Industries as a defendant.
Perhaps the best known climate-change lawsuit against the oil industry is a New York case against Exxon, which was decided in the company's favor in December.
The New York state Attorney General's Office claimed the oil giant defrauded investors of $1.6 billion by knowing but not disclosing the true costs of climate change. A Manhattan state court judge ruled that New York had failed to prove investors were deceived.
"That was an investor-based lawsuit," Ellison said. "This is consumer-based."
The lawsuit was applauded by several state environmental groups, including the Minnesota Center for Environmental Advocacy, Honor the Earth, Fresh Energy and MN350.
"We have a choice over freedom to profit or freedom to breathe," and the oil industry has chosen the former, said Sam Grant, executive director of MN350, at the Wednesday news conference announcing the lawsuit.
People of color - particularly black Americans and Indians - have been disproportionally affected by the ills of climate change, he noted.
"The damage to indigenous people is rising," Winona LaDuke, director of Honor the Earth, said at Wednesday's news conference.
Wild rice, a sacred plant to Minnesota's Ojibwe bands, is at risk as climate change is driving wetter summers, she said. "That will be disastrous to our wild rice."
The lawsuit claims the oil industry knew as early as the 1950s of the potential for global temperature increases and a resulting rise in sea levels. The American Petroleum Institute was specifically aware of such conclusions by the mid-1960s, and Exxon's corporate predecessors soon thereafter, the lawsuit said.
"Throughout the 1970s, it was becoming increasingly clear that climate change could have serious implications for Exxon's business model," the suit said.
It went on to claim that a pattern of deception by the oil industry only intensified over the ensuing decades, including funding research on climate change denial.
From 1997 through 2017, "Koch-controlled foundations gave more than $127 million to groups that obfuscated climate science," the suit alleges.
Mike Hughlett · 612-673-7003

Load-Date: June 25, 2020


End of Documen
t



A 'Global Conversation' about climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
August 9, 2014 Saturday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2014 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 845 words
Byline: JOHN RASH; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: The topic comes to a series at the Minneapolis Central Library, an encouraging environment.


Body


Rolling, roiling global crises spanning the Mideast to Eastern Europe to West Africa dominate the headlines. But they don't seem to be sticking in the heads of most voters - or the candidates courting them.
Gallup's July survey of what Americans consider to be "the most important problem facing this country today" once again was led by an aggregate of aggravating economic problems (totaling 41 percent). Noneconomic problems listed were led by "immigration/illegal aliens" (17 percent).
While the border crisis is by definition an international issue, it doesn't seem to be seen from the perspective of Honduras, El Salvador, Guatemala and Mexico, but rather New Mexico, Arizona, California and Texas. This domestic focus is reflected in Gallup's top foreign-policy issue being foreign policy as an issue - "foreign aid/focus overseas" was listed by 3 percent of respondents. Conversely, "international issues," "terrorism," "wars," "conflict between Middle East nations" and the "war in Afghanistan" were noted by only 1 percent of respondents each.
Whether the public's reluctance to focus on foreign affairs mirrors or is molding the 2014 campaign is unclear. What is clear, however, is that a scant 4.2 percent of congressional campaign ads refer to foreign policy, according to an analysis by Kantar Media that was reported in the New York Times.
As for the truly transnational issue of climate change, there wasn't even a category for that abstract challenge. Perhaps that's because the public is conflicted: A March Gallup poll reported that despite 65 percent believing that "the effects of global warming are happening or will begin to happen during their lifetimes," only 36 percent believe "global warming will pose a serious threat to their way of life during their lifetimes."
This disconnect makes the issue distant in much of the country. But on Wall Street and in Washington, connections are being made. In June, a bipartisan group of former Treasury secretaries and current business leaders issued a bracing report, "Risky Business." And, in Washington, it's not just progressive policy wonks who are worried - the Pentagon and CIA are spooked as well.
"Climate change may exacerbate water scarcity and lead to sharp increases in food costs," said the Defense Department's Quadrennial Defense Review, which was issued in March. The Pentagon went on to warn that the "pressures caused by climate change will influence resource competition while placing additional burdens on economies, societies, and governance institutions around the world. These effects are force multipliers that will aggravate stressors abroad such as poverty, environmental degradation, political instability and social tensions - conditions that can enable terrorist activity and other forms of violence."
The link between climate and food - this month's Minnesota International Center's Great Decisions dialogue -- will also be the topic in a new monthly series, "Global Conversations," which kicks off Wednesday evening at the Minneapolis Central Library. It's the kind of conversation Secretary of State John Kerry called for at last Tuesday's "Working Session on Resilience and Food Security in a Changing Climate." Addressing leaders from 50 countries, Kerry called climate change a "question of political will" and called for action from governments, companies, research institutions, international organizations - and civil society.
Civil society in a civilized setting like the Central Library allows for "a variety of expressions to come through in an environment where there is a general tolerance for exploring, and becoming more sure of the knowledge that's out there," said Helen Burke, senior librarian in business, science and government documents there.
"Tolerance for exploring" isn't usually associated with the climate-change debate, which generates more heat than light. But it fits libraries - especially their evolution as a place where patrons aren't quieted but encouraged to speak up. Americans apparently approve: 58 percent told the Pew Research Center last year that library "programs for adults" are very or somewhat important, and 94 percent believe libraries improve the "quality of life in a community" - a level of trust that is the antithesis of the cynicism surrounding campaign commercials.
Of course, campaign ads exponentially outshout civil-society dialogue. But most ads' callow quality isn't equal to the gravity of most issues. So no matter which side of the debate one is on, maybe it's good that political ads aren't addressing climate change. After all, events like "Global Conversations" - and conversations at kitchen tables - are likely to be more meaningful and durable.
John Rash is a Star Tribune editorial writer and columnist. The Rash Report can be heard at 8:20 a.m. on Friday on WCCO Radio, 830-AM. On Twitter: @rashreport.
The Star Tribune Editorial Board and the Minnesota International Center are partners in "Great Decisions," a monthly dialogue discussing foreign-policy topics. Want to join the conversation? Go to www.micglobe.org.

Load-Date: August 11, 2014


End of Documen
t



Climate change and tart cherries; A U of M graduate who is studying climate change brings her insights back to the U today.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 4, 2006 Wednesday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2006 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3B
Length: 443 words
Byline: Bill McAuliffe, Staff Writer
Body


Growing up in Oriska, N.D., Julie Winkler was "always interested in the wider world." That led her to a degree in geography at the University of North Dakota, a Ph.D. at the University of Minnesota and a professorship at Michigan State University, where she teaches geography, meteorology and climate change. Winkler, 52, will deliver the 14th annual Kuehnast Lecture today at the University of Minnesota, where she'll talk about a project she is leading to assess the risk of climate change on Michigan's tart cherry industry.
Q. Why are tart cherries at the center of a project on climate change?
A. Seventy percent of the U.S. tart-cherry production is in Michigan. You can get your arms around this industry and can use it as prototype for how climate impacts the system....
Cherries are very weather-sensitive. Since [Michigan] growers are the only game in town in the U.S. when it comes to tart-cherry production, they imported cherries into the U.S. from Poland [to cover a weather-related crop failure in 2002]. They don't want to lose their market.
Q. Why is there debate about climate change?
A. It's an inherently uncertain question. We can't say for certain that enhanced greenhouse gases are going to result in [climate] so many degrees warmer in 2040. But we certainly have lot of evidence that would point that way....
But I should point out, too, that there are a lot of other uncertain scientific questions out there, too - so many of our medical questions, particularly the research around cancer.
Q.  You've done some work for women and minorities in science. Can you tell me a little about that?
A.  Currently the number of women Ph.D.s in atmospheric science is only around 20 percent, and only 10 to 15 percent of faculty are women. Meteorology has just not been attracting a diverse group, and any discipline, I think, is always going to be better if it represents society.
Q.  I thought everybody liked to at least talk about the weather.
A.  They love the weather, but they do not like four semesters of calculus. There are just so many places we lose people from being interested ... Not all colleges have atmospheric science, or they might find an uncomfortable social environment if the field is not well-balanced. You need programs to stop the leaky pipeline and encourage people to think about it.
Bill McAuliffe - 612-673-7646
KUEHNAST LECTURE SERIES
Based on an endowment from former Minnesota state climatologist Earl Kuehnast, the annual lecture is open to the public. Today's is scheduled for 3:30 p.m. in Room 335 of Borlaug Hall on the St. Paul campus of the University of Minnesota. For more information, go to www.startribune.com/a1806

Load-Date: October 5, 2006


End of Documen
t



HOME SWEET HOME; 2037; Cisterns collect water, sidewalks soak up the rain. Avatars teach your kids, personal devices monitor your health. Our experts envision a Minnesota house in the climate-changed future.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
March 25, 2007 Sunday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: SOURCE; Pg. 1E
Length: 2225 words
Byline: Karen Youso, Staff Writer
Body


Imagine that you're visiting an open house 30 years in the future. Solar panels hug the roof and a wind turbine spins wildly in the stiff spring breeze. It's raining heavily, yet there are no puddles underfoot. The rain is soaking into the pavement.  Snaking down the sides of the house are large downspouts that disappear into the ground and into what appear to be cisterns. Your ears catch the faint sound of voices and town activity coming from the back of the house, which, you are told, is actually the front.  This house seems backward with all its features from the past: cisterns, home gardens, delivery services, community green. As internationally recognized designer and engineer Chris Luebkeman said, "things we once knew will come back again."
For decades we built houses how and where we wished, concerned only about comfort and style, with little thought to any long-term consequences. But the prospect of a planet with a changed climate is creating a different world.
This will be especially apparent in our housing. Buildings account for nearly half of the nation's yearly "greenhouse gas" emissions, says architect Edward Mazria, founder of Architecture 2030, an organization for protecting the global environment. It can no longer be business as usual.
"We've been using the atmosphere as a convenient sewer for 200 years," said meteorologist Paul Douglas of our greenhouse-gas emissions. "Now it's coming back to bite."
To slow global warming, cope with climate change and avert disaster, experts say, buildings will have to change. It'll amount to a revolution in housing.
Minnesota might need to lead the way. Situated in the middle of the continent, on the nation's rooftop, the state is in the cross hairs of climate change, according to Peter Ciborowski, an analyst who studies climate change for the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
We will see more weather changes than will other parts of the country, because global warming affects northern latitudes most, scientists say. In addition, we have been more prone to the leading edge of arctic air masses, Ciborowski said. Getting fewer of those makes a huge difference.
Precisely what kind of climate changes will occur, and when, is difficult to predict, but scientists are beginning to recognize trends. Minnesota will be warmer and probably wetter overall, but precipitation is likely to come in prodigious amounts interspersed with dry spells, even droughts. Winter will be warmer and shorter with more sleet. Snow will melt days after it falls.
We'll no longer hold a season-long snow pack, Ciborowski predicts.
Expect longer, muggier summers with more hail and an increasing likelihood of extreme weather. That includes tornadoes, Douglas said.
But expect surprises, Ciborowski said. It's important to remember that global warming and climate change are not necessarily steady, predictable processes.
Neither is the shift to more sustainable housing. Development patterns will change. The days of building large homes on vast acreage will vanish. We'll be living in smaller homes, closer together or even attached, and clustered within green areas. These homes will sprout first where there is open land to develop, but the changes eventually will come even to established city neighborhoods as some roadways are abandoned and turned into green or garden areas.
Minnesota's house of the future will have zero carbon emissions, meaning it will need no fossil fuels. The house will also be disaster-resilient, capable of withstanding capricious forces in an unknown weather world. Insurers and governments paying for disaster damage will demand no less.
Needless to say, the house also will be filled with technological wonders.
Interiors of the future
By design, daylight will flood the home, reducing the need for lighting. Window glass will be "switchable," with electrochromic glazing automatically lightening or darkening to control heat gain.
In the kitchen, OLEDs (organic light-emitting diodes) will illuminate work areas. There will be no old-fashioned light switches and no appliances will be visible. The highly efficient, computer-networked appliances will be integrated into a glass-paneled wall.
The technology-packed kitchen, indeed the whole house, will be powered by solar or wind power, gathered either by the house or a community array, with a utility grid as backup. This way, the house operates off the grid and the "meter" runs backward. When there's neither wind nor solar power, the home taps the utility grid.
The home "breathes" by way of small wall-mounted boxes in nearly every room that act as designated ventilation points. With climbing temperatures come air-quality problems. Minnesota will have more days with high levels of ozone, allergens, particulates and humidity, Ciborowski said. You won't be able to count on opening windows. Homes will have controlled ventilation and air that is cleaned and dehumidified.
The house will have no obvious computer area with monitors, drive units and keyboards. Everything will be tied to personal computing devices or embedded in the structure for at-command displays on desktops, walls and windows.
The bathroom will be self-sanitizing. Light-activated nanocoatings will clean better than bleach. A modern "dry toilet" - several generations removed and improved from its predecessor, the composting toilet - will handle waste without water or odor. Waste collects far below the unit in a sealed container where it's composted and managed by a service provider and eventually used as a soil amendment.
Re-use, recycle:  Indoors and out
Much of the home's furnishings - electronic items, entertainment devices, appliances, even the carpet - will be leased. Occupants will contract with companies for products and furnishings. When it's time to upgrade or replace them, the company will install new items and recycle the old, or at least reclaim resources before disposal. Old carpet can be recycled into new, said architect John Carmody, director of the University of Minnesota's Center for Sustainable Building Research. This closes the loop, reducing waste and conserving resources, he said.
The house of the future will have no basement, thus avoiding the inevitable problems with moisture, mold and radon. Controls for heating, ventilation and other mechanical functions will be housed behind a door, in a mechanical pod or nerve center for computer and household operations. In a storm or other catastrophic event, you would head for the house's safe room, built to withstand a Category 5 tornado.
In 2037, a two-bedroom home easily can be converted into a three-bedroom home. Equipped with solid but movable walls, the home will accommodate changes in living needs and conditions. Extended families or other groupings are more likely to live under the same roof in the future, said Carmody, because it's more economical.
The home's second floor will be dominated by a wall of sliding glass doors. The large overhang and "changeable glass" will protect the house from heat gain. Glass doors open onto a roof garden. The turf and gardens keep the house 15 percent cooler. In the middle will be a pool of harvested rainwater. It's the home's third cistern.
The system of cisterns and downspouts is for controlling runoff. Heavy rains in short periods of time - inches an hour - followed by dry periods, even drought, create damaging erosion and flash flooding. Water doesn't soak in to recharge aquifers. The runoff pollutes by discharging more contaminants to surface waters. But in the future house, porous pavement in the home's landscape assists in storm-water control. Tiny spaces in the pavement allow water to drain to the aquifer; the water is filtered by soil along the way.
Even water-rich Minnesota will need to manage its use. Enter the ancient idea of water cisterns. Homeowners' cisterns will capture rainfall, providing nearly pure water for washing, cleaning and watering. This takes pressure off the supply of treated potable water, which comes into the home for drinking, cooking or as backup.
Missing from the outside of the Minnesota house of the future is a garage. Many will rely on vehicles stored and maintained by the community, and ride public transit. By 2037, train lines and busways are foreseen as connecting places such as Rogers, Hastings, Hinckley, Eden Prairie, St. Cloud, Lakeville and points in between. Some people, especially those beyond this service, will drive their own electric or hydrogen vehicles, but they will be leased, not owned.
Defining the future
The house of the future isn't about living with less and doing without. Rather, it's about living well in a reordered world, one that doesn't revolve around oil and unbridled use of resources.
The movement is already underway. The Waldsee BioHaus at Concordia Language Villages in Bemidji, Minn., inspired by German building design, uses solar energy and superior insulation for energy efficiencies far exceeding the average house, and it's a nearly carbon-neutral operation.
These houses are already under construction on a grander scale in Dongtan, China. It's a whole new city designed around sustainability concepts - meeting needs of the present without compromising needs of the future. A half-million people eventually will live and work there, driving nonpolluting cars. With completion dates starting in 2010, Dongtan is viewed as a blueprint for future Chinese cities, and perhaps the world.
By 2037, Minnesota's house of the future might not seem so revolutionary.
Karen Youso - 612-673-4407multitasking kitchens and baths
Illustrations by  Mark Boswell - mboswell@startribune.com
MORE ONLINE
For an interactive look at the future house and additional links to eco-houses, go to www.startribune.com/futurehouse.
THE HOUSE OF THE FUTURE
Breezes move over directional roof vents, creating a vacuum that pulls air through the house when windows are open.
Tilting solar panels provide electricity and thermal solar heating warms water.
Structurally insulated panes feature changeable weather-resistant finishes.
Omni-directional wind turbine is retractable in case of violent weather and supplements other energy sources.
Retractable shutters lower to cover and protect roof garden and windows from hail and wind damage, both of which are more likely in the future.
Downspouts empty into cisterns that manage water in a future with prodigious rains alternating with drought.
Green roof keeps the home cooler, conserves land and serves as the kitchen garden.
In an extended growing season, plants are prolific bloomers as long as gardens are watered regularly and protected from weather surprises.
Homes are oriented to take advantage of the sun's energy, to conserve land and to be able to easily expand or contract as housing needs change.
No basement. A safe room protects occupants during dangerous weather.
No garage. Fewer people own cars as more of them walk, bike, use transit and share vehicles.
ABOUT THE PROJECT
Architect and author John Carmody is an internationally-recognized expert on environmental issues in the design, construction and operation of buildings. Carmody, director of the Center for Sustainable Building Research at the University of Minnesota's College of Architecture and Landscape Architecture, guided the design of our concept house of future.
SOURCES
- Peter Ciborowski, research scientist, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
- Arthur Harkins, professor, Education Policy and Administration, University of Minnesota
- Paul Douglas, meteorologist
- Edward Mazria, architect and founder of the Architecture 2030 initiative
- The 2010 Imperative, Global  Emergency Teach-in, live webcast  from New York City.
- Chris Luebkeman, director, Global Foresight and Innovation, Arup Group, London
- GE's Kitchen of the Future
- Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
- Stephan Tanner, architect, Intep,  Minneapolis
- Institute for Business and Home  Safety, Tampa, Fla.
- Energy Information Center,  Minnesota Department of Commerce
- Center for Energy and the  Environment, Minneapolis
- www.ssa.gov; www.bbc.co.uk; www.discovery.com/2057
- www.mnfuturists.org;The Futurist magazine; www.whatsnextnetwork.com
PROJECT STAFF
Stories: Karen Youso,  youso@startribune.com
Illustrations: Mark Boswell, mboswell@startribune.com
Editors: Susan Barbieri, Rhonda Prast, Martha Buns
Design, layout: Derek Simmons,  Cynthia Dickison
Online coordinator: Troy Melhus
Comments: Paul Klauda, pklauda@startribune.com
ON THE WEB
www.yesterland.com/future house.html: Disneyland's 1957  house of the future.
www.startribune.com/a2470: Video clip of GE's Kitchen of the Future.
waldseebiohaus.typepad.com/biohaus/building.html: Nearly carbon neutral house in Bemidji.
www.discovery.com/2057: An interactive look at the world of the future, year 2057.
More at www.startribune.com/futurehouse.  www.usatoday.com/news/world/2007-02-15-china-eco-city_x.htm: Story and artist's rendering of Dongtan, China. China's city of the future is considered a blueprint of buildings and cities of the future including those in Minnesota. "China can accomplish in weeks, what it takes us years to do," said engineer and designer Chris Luebkeman, with Arup, the British firm behind the city's design.
www.simondale.net/house/index.htm: A low-impact woodland home.
www.thecoolhunter.net/eco-world: Eco-friendly homes, home furnishings and home heating from around the globe.

Graphic

 
ILLUSTRATION
PHOTO

Load-Date: March 27, 2007


End of Documen
t



HOME SWEET HOME; 2037; Cisterns collect water, sidewalks soak up the rain. Avatars teach your kids, personal devices monitor your health. Our experts envision a Minnesota house in the climate-changed future. - Correction Appended
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
March 25, 2007 Sunday, Metro Edition


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: SOURCE; Pg. 1E
Length: 2225 words
Byline: Karen Youso, Staff Writer
Body


Imagine that you're visiting an open house 30 years in the future. Solar panels hug the roof and a wind turbine spins wildly in the stiff spring breeze. It's raining heavily, yet there are no puddles underfoot. The rain is soaking into the pavement.  Snaking down the sides of the house are large downspouts that disappear into the ground and into what appear to be cisterns. Your ears catch the faint sound of voices and town activity coming from the back of the house, which, you are told, is actually the front.  This house seems backward with all its features from the past: cisterns, home gardens, delivery services, community green. As internationally recognized designer and engineer Chris Luebkeman said, "things we once knew will come back again."
For decades we built houses how and where we wished, concerned only about comfort and style, with little thought to any long-term consequences. But the prospect of a planet with a changed climate is creating a different world.
This will be especially apparent in our housing. Buildings account for nearly half of the nation's yearly "greenhouse gas" emissions, says architect Edward Mazria, founder of Architecture 2030, an organization for protecting the global environment. It can no longer be business as usual.
"We've been using the atmosphere as a convenient sewer for 200 years," said meteorologist Paul Douglas of our greenhouse-gas emissions. "Now it's coming back to bite."
To slow global warming, cope with climate change and avert disaster, experts say, buildings will have to change. It'll amount to a revolution in housing.
Minnesota might need to lead the way. Situated in the middle of the continent, on the nation's rooftop, the state is in the cross hairs of climate change, according to Peter Ciborowski, an analyst who studies climate change for the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
We will see more weather changes than will other parts of the country, because global warming affects northern latitudes most, scientists say. In addition, we have been more prone to the leading edge of arctic air masses, Ciborowski said. Getting fewer of those makes a huge difference.
Precisely what kind of climate changes will occur, and when, is difficult to predict, but scientists are beginning to recognize trends. Minnesota will be warmer and probably wetter overall, but precipitation is likely to come in prodigious amounts interspersed with dry spells, even droughts. Winter will be warmer and shorter with more sleet. Snow will melt days after it falls.
We'll no longer hold a season-long snow pack, Ciborowski predicts.
Expect longer, muggier summers with more hail and an increasing likelihood of extreme weather. That includes tornadoes, Douglas said.
But expect surprises, Ciborowski said. It's important to remember that global warming and climate change are not necessarily steady, predictable processes.
Neither is the shift to more sustainable housing. Development patterns will change. The days of building large homes on vast acreage will vanish. We'll be living in smaller homes, closer together or even attached, and clustered within green areas. These homes will sprout first where there is open land to develop, but the changes eventually will come even to established city neighborhoods as some roadways are abandoned and turned into green or garden areas.
Minnesota's house of the future will have zero carbon emissions, meaning it will need no fossil fuels. The house will also be disaster-resilient, capable of withstanding capricious forces in an unknown weather world. Insurers and governments paying for disaster damage will demand no less.
Needless to say, the house also will be filled with technological wonders.
Interiors of the future
By design, daylight will flood the home, reducing the need for lighting. Window glass will be "switchable," with electrochromic glazing automatically lightening or darkening to control heat gain.
In the kitchen, OLEDs (organic light-emitting diodes) will illuminate work areas. There will be no old-fashioned light switches and no appliances will be visible. The highly efficient, computer-networked appliances will be integrated into a glass-paneled wall.
The technology-packed kitchen, indeed the whole house, will be powered by solar or wind power, gathered either by the house or a community array, with a utility grid as backup. This way, the house operates off the grid and the "meter" runs backward. When there's neither wind nor solar power, the home taps the utility grid.
The home "breathes" by way of small wall-mounted boxes in nearly every room that act as designated ventilation points. With climbing temperatures come air-quality problems. Minnesota will have more days with high levels of ozone, allergens, particulates and humidity, Ciborowski said. You won't be able to count on opening windows. Homes will have controlled ventilation and air that is cleaned and dehumidified.
The house will have no obvious computer area with monitors, drive units and keyboards. Everything will be tied to personal computing devices or embedded in the structure for at-command displays on desktops, walls and windows.
The bathroom will be self-sanitizing. Light-activated nanocoatings will clean better than bleach. A modern "dry toilet" - several generations removed and improved from its predecessor, the composting toilet - will handle waste without water or odor. Waste collects far below the unit in a sealed container where it's composted and managed by a service provider and eventually used as a soil amendment.
Re-use, recycle:  Indoors and out
Much of the home's furnishings - electronic items, entertainment devices, appliances, even the carpet - will be leased. Occupants will contract with companies for products and furnishings. When it's time to upgrade or replace them, the company will install new items and recycle the old, or at least reclaim resources before disposal. Old carpet can be recycled into new, said architect John Carmody, director of the University of Minnesota's Center for Sustainable Building Research. This closes the loop, reducing waste and conserving resources, he said.
The house of the future will have no basement, thus avoiding the inevitable problems with moisture, mold and radon. Controls for heating, ventilation and other mechanical functions will be housed behind a door, in a mechanical pod or nerve center for computer and household operations. In a storm or other catastrophic event, you would head for the house's safe room, built to withstand a Category 5 tornado.
In 2037, a two-bedroom home easily can be converted into a three-bedroom home. Equipped with solid but movable walls, the home will accommodate changes in living needs and conditions. Extended families or other groupings are more likely to live under the same roof in the future, said Carmody, because it's more economical.
The home's second floor will be dominated by a wall of sliding glass doors. The large overhang and "changeable glass" will protect the house from heat gain. Glass doors open onto a roof garden. The turf and gardens keep the house 15 percent cooler. In the middle will be a pool of harvested rainwater. It's the home's third cistern.
The system of cisterns and downspouts is for controlling runoff. Heavy rains in short periods of time - inches an hour - followed by dry periods, even drought, create damaging erosion and flash flooding. Water doesn't soak in to recharge aquifers. The runoff pollutes by discharging more contaminants to surface waters. But in the future house, porous pavement in the home's landscape assists in storm-water control. Tiny spaces in the pavement allow water to drain to the aquifer; the water is filtered by soil along the way.
Even water-rich Minnesota will need to manage its use. Enter the ancient idea of water cisterns. Homeowners' cisterns will capture rainfall, providing nearly pure water for washing, cleaning and watering. This takes pressure off the supply of treated potable water, which comes into the home for drinking, cooking or as backup.
Missing from the outside of the Minnesota house of the future is a garage. Many will rely on vehicles stored and maintained by the community, and ride public transit. By 2037, train lines and busways are foreseen as connecting places such as Rogers, Hastings, Hinckley, Eden Prairie, St. Cloud, Lakeville and points in between. Some people, especially those beyond this service, will drive their own electric or hydrogen vehicles, but they will be leased, not owned.
Defining the future
The house of the future isn't about living with less and doing without. Rather, it's about living well in a reordered world, one that doesn't revolve around oil and unbridled use of resources.
The movement is already underway. The Waldsee BioHaus at Concordia Language Villages in Bemidji, Minn., inspired by German building design, uses solar energy and superior insulation for energy efficiencies far exceeding the average house, and it's a nearly carbon-neutral operation.
These houses are already under construction on a grander scale in Dongtan, China. It's a whole new city designed around sustainability concepts - meeting needs of the present without compromising needs of the future. A half-million people eventually will live and work there, driving nonpolluting cars. With completion dates starting in 2010, Dongtan is viewed as a blueprint for future Chinese cities, and perhaps the world.
By 2037, Minnesota's house of the future might not seem so revolutionary.
Karen Youso - 612-673-4407multitasking kitchens and baths
Illustrations by  Mark Boswell - mboswell@startribune.com
MORE ONLINE
For an interactive look at the future house and additional links to eco-houses, go to www.startribune.com/futurehouse.
THE HOUSE OF THE FUTURE
Breezes move over directional roof vents, creating a vacuum that pulls air through the house when windows are open.
Tilting solar panels provide electricity and thermal solar heating warms water.
Structurally insulated panes feature changeable weather-resistant finishes.
Omni-directional wind turbine is retractable in case of violent weather and supplements other energy sources.
Retractable shutters lower to cover and protect roof garden and windows from hail and wind damage, both of which are more likely in the future.
Downspouts empty into cisterns that manage water in a future with prodigious rains alternating with drought.
Green roof keeps the home cooler, conserves land and serves as the kitchen garden.
In an extended growing season, plants are prolific bloomers as long as gardens are watered regularly and protected from weather surprises.
Homes are oriented to take advantage of the sun's energy, to conserve land and to be able to easily expand or contract as housing needs change.
No basement. A safe room protects occupants during dangerous weather.
No garage. Fewer people own cars as more of them walk, bike, use transit and share vehicles.
ABOUT THE PROJECT
Architect and author John Carmody is an internationally-recognized expert on environmental issues in the design, construction and operation of buildings. Carmody, director of the Center for Sustainable Building Research at the University of Minnesota's College of Architecture and Landscape Architecture, guided the design of our concept house of future.
SOURCES
- Peter Ciborowski, research scientist, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
- Arthur Harkins, professor, Education Policy and Administration, University of Minnesota
- Paul Douglas, meteorologist
- Edward Mazria, architect and founder of the Architecture 2030 initiative
- The 2010 Imperative, Global  Emergency Teach-in, live webcast  from New York City.
- Chris Luebkeman, director, Global Foresight and Innovation, Arup Group, London
- GE's Kitchen of the Future
- Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
- Stephan Tanner, architect, Intep,  Minneapolis
- Institute for Business and Home  Safety, Tampa, Fla.
- Energy Information Center,  Minnesota Department of Commerce
- Center for Energy and the  Environment, Minneapolis
- www.ssa.gov; www.bbc.co.uk; www.discovery.com/2057
- www.mnfuturists.org;The Futurist magazine; www.whatsnextnetwork.com
PROJECT STAFF
Stories: Karen Youso,  youso@startribune.com
Illustrations: Mark Boswell, mboswell@startribune.com
Editors: Susan Barbieri, Rhonda Prast, Martha Buns
Design, layout: Derek Simmons,  Cynthia Dickison
Online coordinator: Troy Melhus
Comments: Paul Klauda, pklauda@startribune.com
ON THE WEB
www.yesterland.com/future house.html: Disneyland's 1957  house of the future.
www.startribune.com/a2470: Video clip of GE's Kitchen of the Future.
waldseebiohaus.typepad.com/biohaus/building.html: Nearly carbon neutral house in Bemidji.
www.discovery.com/2057: An interactive look at the world of the future, year 2057.
More at www.startribune.com/futurehouse.  www.usatoday.com/news/world/2007-02-15-china-eco-city_x.htm: Story and artist's rendering of Dongtan, China. China's city of the future is considered a blueprint of buildings and cities of the future including those in Minnesota. "China can accomplish in weeks, what it takes us years to do," said engineer and designer Chris Luebkeman, with Arup, the British firm behind the city's design.
www.simondale.net/house/index.htm: A low-impact woodland home.
www.thecoolhunter.net/eco-world: Eco-friendly homes, home furnishings and home heating from around the globe.
Correction


This story misstated the location of the University of Minnesota's Center for Sustainable Building Research. It is in the university's College of Design.
Correction-Date: April 1, 2007 Sunday


Graphic

 
ILLUSTRATION
PHOTO

Load-Date: April 3, 2007


End of Documen
t



Advisory group on climate change takes tentative first steps; The state panel OK'd some climate-change goals but steered away from making recommendations for strategies the energy industry might consider. - Correction Appended
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
December 6, 2007 Thursday, Metro Edition


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7B
Length: 540 words
Byline: Bill McAuliffe, Staff Writer
Body


A state advisory panel endorsed a handful of climate-change mitigation goals - including lowering speed limits - on Wednesday, but backed off recommending a wide range of high-impact strategies for the energy industry.
By getting behind energy conservation measures already in law and approving construction and building regulations designed to improve energy efficiencies, the Minnesota Climate Change Advisory Group took its first concrete steps since it began meeting in April.
But the assembly of several dozen leaders from business, environmental and other groups has only until Jan. 31 to forward to Gov. Tim Pawlenty a package of what could be more than 50 recommendations for how the state might meet the long-term greenhouse gas reduction goals set by Pawlenty and the Legislature.
Among the recommendations is looking at dropping interstate highway speed limits from 65 to 55 miles per hour in the city and 70 to 60 mph in the country. Others include the outline of a cap and a trading market for carbon dioxide emissions and recommendations for alternatives to fossil fuel energy. But they might also include exotic ideas for storing excessive atmospheric carbon and even for changing Minnesotans' driving habits.
On Wednesday, though, the group declined to give a nod to policies that would block energy producers from making long-term investments in coal-based energy and encourage utilities to become more efficient with existing plants, including possibly burning biomass - plant materials and animal waste - in place of coal.
Those ideas were sent back to the researchers following objections, largely from business and industry participants, that their costs hadn't been fine-tuned enough.
Mike Robertson, environmental policy director for the Minnesota Chamber of Commerce, posted a standing objection to nearly every provision examined by the group.
"The Minnesota Chamber is behind energy efficiency. But many of these [recommendations] would require government incentives, and we want to know what they are," he said.
Barbara Freese, a consultant with the Union of Concerned Scientists, an environmental advocacy group, agreed that the economic impacts need more study, but suggested it might not satisfy everyone on the panel.
"It will be hard to build consensus," she said. "But I'd be surprised if we didn't come up with a plan."
Sen. Ellen Anderson, DFL-St. Paul, sponsor of the bill that now requires utilities to produce energy with 25 percent renewable energy by 2025, said it's no surprise the panel would approve relatively noncontroversial items first. Whatever its ultimate recommendations, they are likely to be embraced at the Legislature, she said.
"They're going to have to look at some significant policy issues and probably will face some resistance from industry," Anderson said. "But they have a presumption of reflecting a broad cross-section of people. If those representatives sign on, I think they will have clout."
The Associated Press contributed to this report. Bill McAuliffe - 612-673-7646
WANT TO KNOW MORE?
For more information on the Minnesota Climate Change Advisory Group, including policy proposals, members, meeting schedules and phone numbers for public participation, go to www.mnclimatechange.us/ .
Correction


This article incorrectly described action taken Wednesday by the Minnesota Climate Change Advisory Committee. The group did not discuss or recommend reducing speed limits on highways.
Correction-Date: December 8, 2007


Load-Date: December 13, 2007


End of Documen
t



birding; ON THE WING; Disappearing act threatens Minnesota; Climate change will undoubtedly affect birds. In fact, it already has.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 19, 2006 Wednesday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2006 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: HOME & GARDEN; Pg. 5H
Length: 592 words
Byline: Jim Williams
Body


After seeing the environmental documentary "An Inconvenient Truth," I thought about how climate change will affect birds.
Minnesota will lose species. In fact, it already is losing some.
Here's why: Some species are generalists that are able to live in a wide variety of habitats and conditions. But most birds are specialists that require particular habitats. And habitat is closely linked to climate.
Change climate and you change habitat. Change habitat and you change the mix of birds.
Jeff Price, an assistant professor in the Department of Geological and Environmental Sciences at California State University, Chico, studies climate as it relates to birds. He has predicted changes in our bird populations based on a supposed doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide. (This is a projection for the end of this century, although, he points out, change already can be seen.)
In his scenario, Minnesota would lose 36 nesting species of birds, including red-breasted nuthatches, purple finches, evening grosbeaks and 17 species of warblers. We might see those birds in migration, but they would no longer nest here.
An additional 27 species would restrict their range to far northern Minnesota, perhaps just the Arrowhead Region. Gone from yards in the Twin Cities would be American goldfinches, tree swallows, white-breasted nuthatches, house wrens, gray catbirds, scarlet tanagers, rose-breasted grosbeaks, chipping sparrows and song sparrows, to mention a few. "Recent work suggests that for some species, the changes are occurring now," Price said. "There are several prominent scientists who think that the observed changes are occurring at a rate in excess of what one would expect to see from the models, so things might be worse," he said.
He also discussed what he called "a squeeze" on some species. "Species are actually arriving earlier on their breeding grounds," he said, "and may be having better breeding success in the core of their range, but are disappearing from the more southerly parts of the ranges. These species are not moving appreciably any farther north, however, because of lack of suitable habitat."
The prothonotary warbler, which nests along the Mississippi and St. Croix Rivers, is one example. It's being squeezed at the southern end of its breeding range, but isn't moving north. Habitat, in other words, is not keeping pace with climate.
Price also mentioned studies in Europe that reveal a disconnect between when birds arrive on their breeding grounds and when the insects they eat are available.
Birds have evolved to reach their breeding territories when the food supply is at its highest. However, in some cases the insects are emerging either earlier or later than normal, most likely because of climate change. Because the food these birds need to prepare for breeding and to feed their young is not available, the populations decline.
One the other side of the global warming coin, some birds will expand their ranges in - or into - Minnesota. These include western kingbirds, horned larks, scissor-tailed flycatchers, Northern mockingbirds, tufted titmouses, blue grosbeaks and orchard orioles.
All of these predicted changes, of course, are predictions. We might actually get our act together and forcefully address climate change. But there already is evidence of change in the distribution of birds and I would bet that more will come.
Jim Williams is a lifelong birder and co-author of the book "Questions and Answers About Backyard Birds" (Adventure Publications, $9.95). He can be reached by e-mail at two-jays@att.net.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: July 19, 2006


End of Documen
t



COMING OF AGE IN THE ERA OF CLIMATE CHANGE
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
April 21, 2019 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: VARIETY; Pg. 1E
Length: 1050 words
Byline: KEVYN BURGER /ISTOCK PHOTO, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: While "climate grief" has many young people mired in worry about a warming planet, others are taking action.


Body


Special to the Star Tribune
Helen Meigs thinks about climate change. A lot.
"It's always in the back of my mind," said the Macalester College sophomore.
Concern about climate change isn't rare on campus. In fact, she's convinced it's widespread.
"My whole generation wonders if we're getting cheated out of a full future, and we can't put it out of our minds," she said. "It's an anxiety-inducing situation."
That anxiety has a name: climate grief.
In 2017, the American Psychological Association recognized the complex mental health burden in people who have experienced losses from natural disasters associated with climate change. It also found evidence that the warming planet is churning up an emotional stew of anxiety, depression and pervasive dread.
Young people, in particular, seem susceptible to the psychological toll from the steady stream of bleak scientific studies and reports of melting glaciers, rising seas and extreme weather events.
"Those of us who work in the climate change world see young people mourning the losses that are coming," said Sarah Goodspeed, youth and policy manager of Generation Climate, an advocacy group founded by Minnesota polar explorer Will Steger. "These reactions are real and valid."
California social scientist Renee Lertzman concurs. Lertzman studies the mental health and emotional components of environmental degradation. She likens the climate-related stress now plaguing teenagers and 20-somethings to the oppressive Cold War fears that gripped young baby boomers, many of whom came of age under the threat of nuclear annihilation.
"It's on that emotional continuum, the feeling that the world is heading into a very uncertain, chaotic place and the impact is potentially devastating," she said. "It's a painful place to be."
Lertzman said that pain can prompt some young people to embrace activism, while others can become mired in what she calls "environmental melancholia," an underlying sense of sadness.
"In my research, I find those people who experience helplessness and hopelessness," she said. "They feel like it's already too late and there's not much an individual can do to change what's coming."
Christie Manning, a research psychologist and assistant professor of environmental psychology at Macalester College in St. Paul, said that such a response is understandable.
"Anxiety is a normal reaction to what we read in the data on climate change," she said. "If you see frightening things coming, fear and worry are a logical response to it."
Those in the emerging field of environmental psychology are trying to determine the best ways to deal with such fear and worry.
While it's now known how to effectively comfort those mourning a death or other significant loss, research into how to support those who are experiencing climate grief is just getting underway.
So far, it seems that banding together and taking action are promising.
"We know there are incredible emotional benefits to being part of a community that's engaged in finding solutions," Manning said.
She's seen firsthand how fear has been a galvanizing force for some young adults. "Students I'm working with feel a sense of urgency. They have a mission, a sense of purpose and determination," she said. "A great antidote to despair is action."
Hustling to be heard
Shahad Geer is doing what she can to stave off despair. While the St. Paul teen admits that she finds climate change "frightening," she said it's given her a sense of immediacy.
"It sounds cheesy, but it's a life or death situation," she said. "We have to make a change and make it quick."
That's why the Roosevelt High School sophomore was among a coalition of high school activists who visited Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz days after his inauguration to push for climate action. One of their proposals sought his support to move Minnesota toward 100% renewable energy. Walz has since set a goal for the state's electrical utility companies to generate carbon-free power by 2050.
Geer got interested in the science of climate change when she wrote a research paper on the subject in eighth grade. Now she's active with the Youth Environmental Activists of Minnesota (YEA! MN), one of the statewide youth-led networks convened by Climate Generation. It is one of several grassroots organizations working in the state to mobilize high school and college students on the issue. It seeks to guide students to make lifestyle changes to reduce their carbon footprint, but also prepares them to take action as a way to manage their feelings of distress.
"It's giving us a voice," Geer said. "It helped me learn how to lobby and how to talk to political leaders. We're very worried, so we're hustling our butts to be heard."
Goodspeed said, "The research shows that when [young people] take power even on a small scale within their homes, schools and communities, they can turn their grief into action. It's how those emotions are channeled that will determine the long-term mental health effects for them."
She said she sees a strong sense of responsibility in young people pushing public policy at the state and local levels aimed at blunting the effects of climate change.
"They are prepared to take action to protect their world. They have bold ideas that an older generation doesn't think can be achieved," she said.
Taking the lead
In December, Meigs traveled with other Macalester classmates to Washington, joining 1,000 college students canvassing congressional offices. They staged sit-ins and lobbied the incoming Democratic majority to prioritize the Green New Deal, which promotes a broad series of environmental and economic changes.
"We have to put climate change at the forefront of the political agenda, make it part of the national conversation," Meigs said. "Our generation is taking the lead and taking matters into our own hands."
An international studies major with an environmental studies concentration, Meigs is planning a career that will follow her passion.
"Some days I'm motivated to do well in school so l can get a job that can make a difference. Other days I think, what does my GPA matter when we are headed for climate catastrophe?" she said. "I want to work to delay or stop climate change.
"Nothing else really matters if we don't do that."
Kevyn Burger is a Minneapolis-based freelance broadcaster and writer.

Load-Date: April 22, 2019


End of Documen
t



For Cargill, changing climate is about risk
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
February 1, 2015 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2015 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D
Length: 994 words
Byline: LEE SCHAFER; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


Business leaders looking for a smart way to influence the most controversial questions in public life can do much worse than follow the example of Cargill and its former CEO, Greg Page, on the question of addressing climate change.
The reason you haven't heard that a high-profile executive like Page has become a climate change activist, is because, well, he really hasn't. He doesn't go on TV to demand passage of a new tax on carbon emissions, and he doesn't seem likely to start.
Instead all he's asking is that business managers make the risks inherent in a changing climate a regular part of their planning.
Page, who remains executive chairman of Cargill, calls his approach "starting in the middle." He noted that there's no shortage of loud voices at either end, and if climate change "believers" want to argue with the climate change "deniers," they can have at it.
Page would rather talk about taking steps now to make sure Upper Midwest farmers can see their grain continue to be shipped on river barges, as big swings in water levels brought on by extreme drought and excessive rain become more common. That's managing a risk.
And yes, this kind of thinking in business could be a very big difference maker on whether the public swings around to supporting action on the threat of climate change. Watch the business leaders, not what they are saying, but how they're investing their money. That should say quite a lot.
In a conversation last week in his office at Cargill, Page explained that he wasn't exactly eager to join a climate change discussion when former Secretary of the Treasury Henry Paulson invited him to join the risk committee of a research project Paulson and two others had started.
Not that he doesn't find this topic to be important to Cargill. He sees very little for a corporate leader to gain by weighing in on a public policy issue that doesn't really touch the mission of the business, but climate change is close to home for his company.
Cargill plays in the food industry up and down the chain. What to grow, and where, is highly climate-dependent. And Cargill has also been assessing and managing risk for its entire 150 years in business.
His reluctance was mostly because farmers are the custom
ers of Cargill, and Page said that the typical farmer hears "climate change" and jumps immediately to the threat of government regulatory overreach.
But regardless of one's views about climate change, Page thinks it's just plain irresponsible for anyone, at Cargill or a family farm, to look at a growing pile of scientific research on the topic and decide to do absolutely nothing different.
So Page joined Paulson's project, called Risky Business, though he explained that Cargill economists, crop scientists and other staffers spent more time on this than he did.
The result of some of their work can be seen in the project's most recent report, now out for a little over a week. This one focused exclusively on the risk of climate change here in the economy of the Midwest.
The report concluded that if we continue on our current path for carbon emissions, and without any adaptation, "by the end of the century the Midwest will likely see overall agricultural losses for corn and wheat of 11 percent to 69 percent across the region as a whole, with a one in 20 chance of more than an 80 percent decline."
In addition to the sobering idea that much of the Corn Belt may no longer be the Corn Belt, Page sees risks up and down the food production system. It's recently been possible, within the span of maybe 15 months, to see water so high that barges on upper Midwestern rivers will not fit under the grain loading spout and so low that loaded barges can get stuck on the bottom.
Page also recently learned that between 2012 and 2013, the planting date for crops varied 36 days from one year to the next, which means any sensible farmer looking ahead to the coming growing season can't assume anything based on the previous year.
And yes, he said, some farmers he's met are crabby about his involvement in climate change discussions. But in general farmers are more open than the public may realize to new thinking on the risks posed by a changing climate to their business. One example he cited was Tier IV emissions technology for new diesel tractors, and American farmers don't seem to gripe about that.
Inside a company like Cargill, Page said, once assessing the risks of a hotter climate becomes a normal part of business planning, it can affect all sorts of decisions. When it comes time to replace Cargill's animal handling buildings in southeastern Iowa, for example, maybe the roofs will need to be built with more insulation to mitigate some of the effects of a hot summer sun.
A better insulated roof, however, is a way for a company to react to a warmer climate. That approach is sure to frustrate climate change activists, who would probably much rather see Cargill join with other big businesses to take big steps now to cut greenhouse gas emissions and make it less likely that the planet warms.
By Cargill's actions, however, it's interested in more than adapting to a warmer climate.
Its facility in Uberlandia, Brazil, is one example. The company burns a wood-chip fuel derived from local eucalyptus trees for 70 percent of the electricity and all of the heat needed at this plant.
Page is clearly interested in seeing fossil fuel use cut by businesses, but what he seems most interested in talking about is making sure the planet has enough to eat.
"When we first started talking with the group from Risky Business, 'adaptation' sort of struck them as the second cousin of this effort," he said, although it helped to add the idea of resilience to the discussion. "In food, adaptation and resilience has just got to be the focus, because you just don't want to be wrong."
The implications of being wrong about the effects of climate change on food production, he added, "are too big."
lee.schafer@startribune.com · 612-673-4302

Load-Date: February 2, 2015


End of Documen
t



Students strike to 'cause an uproar' on climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
March 16, 2019 Saturday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 708 words
Byline: TOREY VAN OOT; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


High school students across the Twin Cities staged a walkout to demand action on climate change Friday, meeting en masse at the State Capitol to press lawmakers on the issue.
"We need to cause an uproar," said Maya Sprenger-Otto, an organizer and student at Washburn High School in Minneapolis, addressing a crowd of several hundred teens on the Capitol steps. "We won't be stopped until substantial change is made."
Friday's student "strike" in the Twin Cities was part of a wave of youth-led climate demonstrations across the globe. Similar walkouts, inspired by a protest staged by a Swedish teen, were held in more than 100 cities worldwide, with some rallies attracting tens of thousands of marchers.
In Minnesota, students also gathered in Duluth and Rochester.
Students at the St. Paul rally said their goal is to send a message to lawmakers that they want immediate change to protect their future. Many cited a 2018 United Nations report on climate change calling for "rapid and far-reaching" changes to slow global warming in the coming years. Failure to act, authors cautioned, will result in dire and irreversible consequences for both the environment and the world's population.
Ruthie Hottinger, a seventh-grader from Shoreview, worries that "things are getting out of control and it's scary." Three friends told her in the last week that they don't want to have children because they fear the effects of climate change will have on the world, she said.
"In my future I see a world that's safe to live in and smiling faces all around," Hottinger, 13, told the crowd. But that's not going to happen if you and I don't stand up for what we want and what we need."
Max Sherman, a senior at De La Salle High School, echoed those calls for immediate action.
"We need to get involved and show the government that we can't just stand back while we basically have 11 years left to save the planet and save ourselves," said Sherman, who took Metro Transit to the rally along with 80 of his peers from the private Catholic high school. Like many other groups, Sherman and his classmates organized their walkout plans using social media and word of mouth.
The hundreds of sign-carrying students gathered at the Capitol brought a long list of policy demands. Teen organizers said a national emergency on climate is long overdue. They called for action on clean water, climate education in schools and passage of the Green New Deal, a sweeping federal resolution focused on renewable energy, health care and jobs. On the state level, the students urged passage of a bill mandating 100 percent renewable energy use by 2050 and an end to the Enbridge Line 3 oil pipeline replacement project.
"If action isn't taken now, it will be our mess to clean up," said Farrah Bergstrom, a sophomore at Wayzata High School who has worked on progressive campaigns since age 13. "It's imperative that leaders and legislators in this Capitol recognize our deep concern for climate change. This isn't a distant issue, it's something that's going to have very severe influence on us in the near future."
Beyond those immediate goals, student activists said they hope to spark a broader cultural shift. Some of the loudest cheers came as speakers made the case that the impacts of climate change go beyond the environment and the economy. At it's heart, they said, it's an issue of racial justice and equity.
"This movement needs to be different in terms of we should be working with marginalized communities. No one knows our struggle like we do," said youth radio host Britney Chino, a student activist with Young Peoples Action Coalition St. Paul. "I saw a poster earlier today saying climate change does not affect all equally, and that is the truth."
Public opinion surveys suggest climate change is a mobilizing force for young voters, who went to the polls in record numbers in 2018. Marchers said they expect the issue to be a top priority for their voting-age peers in the upcoming election. Signs reading "Vote the cowards out!" and "Denial is not policy" floated above the crowd.
"We've shown our power and we do not plan to stop," said Sprenger-Otto, who plans to cast her first ballot next year. "That will be carried out into 2020 and beyond."
Torey Van Oot · 651-925-5049

Load-Date: March 18, 2019


End of Documen
t



Evangelical fold gets new leader; An Eden Prairie pastor steps into the national spotlight at a political turning point, and he's already turning heads by preaching about climate change as a religious issue.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 7, 2007 Sunday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1383 words
Byline: Curt Brown, Staff Writer
Body


Hands in his pockets, blue shirt collar unbuttoned, the Rev. Leith Anderson strolled around his pulpit at the massive Wooddale Church on a recent Sunday.
With wire-rimmed glasses and gray hair, he exuded the relaxed air of a college professor talking to a class of 20 instead of a minister heading a congregation of 5,000.
"The way we live transforms the people around us," Anderson preached that morning, moving from one service to another on Wooddale's vast campus in Eden Prairie.
In his 30 years as Wooddale's pastor, he has overseen the church's growth from a chapel in Richfield to the current site, which includes a bookstore, cafe and gym and is home to five packed services each weekend. Members come from across the Twin Cities and include Gov. Tim Pawlenty and First Lady Mary Pawlenty.
Now, the 62-year-old Anderson is gaining an even bigger pulpit: the presidency of the National Association of Evangelicals.
The organization boasts 45,000 member churches and 30 million members from 60 Christian denominations.
After a year as interim president, Anderson takes charge at a critical moment for the evangelical movement, which is fractured over its priorities and reeling from a sex-and-drugs scandal involving one of its former leaders.
The Rev. Ted Haggard was considered one of the religious right's movers and shakers until resigning after admitting to "sexual immorality" involving drugs and a Denver male escort last year.
In stepped Anderson, who is already credited with shoring up the NAE's credibility while trying to broaden its agenda.
An avid traveler, Anderson recently returned from an Alaskan island suffering from the effects of global warming. He has tangled with some evangelicals by adding climate change to an agenda that heretofore has ridden down the twin tracks of opposition to abortion and same-sex marriage, still cornerstones of the movement.
For a group unapologetic, according to its website, about "advancing the agenda of conservative, evangelical Christian America," next year's presidential election also is a priority - and a mystery.
"I think there's a real interest in what the evangelical vote will be in 2008, but the truth is I have absolutely no idea," said Anderson, who sounds underwhelmed by the current candidates.
The anti-Haggard
While Haggard relished life in Washington, Anderson approaches his monthly visits with the enthusiasm of a child sipping cough syrup.
"It's not a job I aspire to, but I recognize that it's part of my responsibility," he said. "So I do what I need to do."
Even if Anderson doesn't endorse a candidate, experts agree that he'll still have a lot of influence, although the extent of the fallout from Haggard's problems remains to be seen.
"I'm not really sure we fully realize the damage yet," said the Rev. Kevin Mannoia, a past NAE president and currently a chaplain at Azusa Pacific University. "It might take a general election to really see it."
With no evangelical expected to top either party's 2008 presidential ticket, some think the influence of people like Anderson will shrink.
"Inside and outside the evangelical movement, people are tired of the religious right's harangue on two hot-button issues," said Jeffery Sheler, who wrote the book "Believers: A Journey into Evangelical America."
But Anderson's strength, he added, may be the ability to strike a chord with more moderate, independent voters.
"The up-and-coming new guard of evangelical leadership is coming, like Leith Anderson, from the ranks of churches and are accustomed to the broad needs of a community," Sheler said. "That will translate into more reasoned and moderate politics than the hard-edged, narrowly focused platforms of the TV preachers and the religious right."
`Not a flame-thrower'
On a recent Sunday, Austin Chapman stopped for post-worship coffee at Wooddale's bustling cafe. In 1976, Chapman flew to Colorado to scout and interview Anderson, then 32 and pastor of a Denver-area church.
"Leith's father was a pastor at the same church for nearly 40 years and a long tenure is a good thing in most enterprises," said Chapman, 79, proud that his hire is still at Wooddale.
"This is not a flame-thrower guy," he said. "He's not a political guy, and you'll never hear a political sermon here. Never. That's not what he's about. "
The outgoing president of Bethel University in Arden Hills, George Brushaber, has been close to Anderson for three decades.
"He's not using this national association as a stepping stone to get some kind of platform for more political influence," Brushaber said. "He's first and foremost a churchman.
"That's obviously a different agenda than what drove Haggard," he added.
Mannoia said Haggard's fall "was like a kick in the gut" and Anderson's leadership has helped ease the fallout.
Whether he can complete the post-Haggard healing in time for the election will test his influence among evangelicals, who make up as much as a quarter of the voting public.
"He won't be able to assume a role in speaking on behalf of evangelicals broadly," Mannoia said. "That's not a function of whether he's worthy, it's just the function of an organization that has come to be seen as rather suspect in a lot of people's minds."
Despite his low-key nature, Anderson's power shouldn't be underestimated, according to the Rev. Greg Boyd, pastor at Woodland Hills Church in Maplewood and an outspoken critic of mixing religion and politics.
"A lot of evangelicals take their cues from what the NAE is about," Boyd said. "It doesn't make him the `pope of evangelicals,' but it does put him in the position of great influence."
Returning from Alaska
Anderson recently returned from Shishmaref, a remote Alaskan island where climate change has melted the permafrost, forcing native Caribou hunters and fishermen to move from their ancestral homes.
Anderson said his interest in climate change is deeply rooted in his Bible.
"God is the creator and we need to be good stewards because changes in climate are often most hurtful to those who are the poorest of our society," he said. "God calls us to care about the poor."
Anderson said there's near unanimity among evangelicals opposing abortion and same-sex marriage. But some on the religious right, including Focus on the Family's James Dobson, have objected to the NAE's foray into global warming because it diffuses opposition to abortion and gay marriage.
"It's been added increasingly to the evangelical conversation and agenda, and that's been uncomfortable for some," Anderson said. "Good leaders lead people in the right direction to where they need to go. Sometimes that's where they want to go and sometimes it's not."
So Leith Anderson tiptoes toward Election Day, trying to be true to the Bible while "relating to the culture that is today.
"You can't stick to the old ways, but you can't abandon them either," he said. "The risk is people will be faithful to the Bible but irrelevant to their generation. Or you'll be relevant to your generation but abandon the truth of God."
Curt Brown - 612-673-4767
ABOUT LEITH ANDERSON
Jobs: Senior pastor at Wooddale Church in Eden Prairie since Jan. 1, 1977; president of the National Association of Evangelicals (www.nae.net), which draws from 60 denominations and includes roughly 45,000 churches with 30 million members.
Before and after: Anderson served as NAE president before the Rev. Ted Haggard and then became interim president after Haggard's fall during a 2006 drugs-and-sex scandal.
Age: 62
Family: Son of a pastor who spent more than 30 years at his church, Anderson grew up in New Jersey near his wife of 42 years, Charleen. They have four children.
Education: Bradley University in Peoria, Ill., Denver Seminary and Fuller Theological Seminary in Pasadena, Calif.
Writings and radio: Anderson's many books include a biography of Jesus and "A Church of the 21st Century." His two-minute radio show, "Faith Matters," is broadcast nationally on Christian radio.
Travel: He's visited all seven continents, including a trip to Antarctica as a gift from churchgoers to honor his 25th anniversary at Wooddale.
His name: Rhymes with Keith. His mother grew up in England on the Scottish border, where the Edinburgh port is named Leith. He's only met one other Leith in 62 years, and that was a woman.
Quote: "The way we live transforms people around us."

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: October 9, 2007


End of Documen
t



Mpls., St. Paul join Bloomberg climate change initiative
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 30, 2018 Tuesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2018 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 720 words
Byline: EMMA NELSON; ROCHELLE OLSON; STAFF WRITERS, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Ex-New York City mayor's charity giving $2.5M to each city as part of $70M effort.


Body


Minneapolis and St. Paul have signed on to Michael Bloomberg's charitable program to make American cities more climate-friendly, with each city getting a $2.5 million boost for local projects to combat a global threat.
The two cities are among 20 municipalities that Bloomberg Philanthropies - the former New York City mayor's charitable organization - has chosen to support in carrying out local efforts to fight climate change, through a $70 million program called the American Cities Climate Challenge.
Bloomberg, who is the United Nations' special envoy for climate action, visited the Twin Cities on Monday and spoke at an event in downtown Minneapolis with mayors Jacob Frey and Melvin Carter. It's up to local governments - and the mayors who lead them - to take on climate change, Bloomberg said.
"Mayors just can't avoid the risks that we face, because their constituents already are feeling the effects, and they do expect City Hall to take action," said Bloomberg, mayor of New York from 2002 to 2013.
Leaders in both Minneapolis and St. Paul have increasingly taken stands on national issues, citing disagreement with the policies of the federal government and President Donald Trump. Though both cities are already working to fight climate change - and have set goals to drastically reduce carbon emissions by 2050 - the two mayors said Monday that they plan to do more, with Bloomberg's help.
"People are calling right now for cities to step up and lead, and we most definitely are going to answer that call," Frey said.
Each mayor announced a set of initiatives that they plan to accomplish by 2020, including reducing carbon emissions from city buildings, increasing the use of solar power and improving residents' access to forms of transportation other than gas-powered cars.
"We all know that the impacts of climate change are hurting our communities, they're impacting our cities and they cannot go unanswered," Carter said.
Each city will receive $2.5 million in grant money and other resources from Bloomberg Philanthropies to carry out their goals over two years. Other participating cities include Los Angeles, Boston, Chicago, Seattle and Washington, D.C.
The announcement comes less than a month after the U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change released a report calling for immediate global action on climate change. If global warming continues at its current rate, the report said, millions of people will experience the catastrophic consequences, from severe flooding to food shortages.
Call for action on gun violence
Bloomberg, a billionaire media mogul who has floated the possibility of a 2020 presidential run, was blunt in his criticism of federal policies on climate change - including Trump's decision to pull the United States out of the Paris Accord - as well as on the issue of gun violence.
Flanked by the two mayors against the backdrop of the Stone Arch Bridge, Bloomberg began his remarks by acknowledging Saturday's mass shooting at the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh.
"We have to do something to see if we can't bring this country together and stop more tragedies like this," Bloomberg said.
Later Monday, Bloomberg, Frey and Carter headed to St. Paul's W.A. Frost restaurant for a gathering of several dozen volunteer activists and victims who have lost loved ones to gun violence. Everytown For Gun Safety and Moms Demand Action, two national grass roots organizations, hosted the event.
The former mayor said the nation needs to keep guns out of the hands of minors and people with psychological problems and criminal histories. He also advocated closing the loophole for internet and gun show sales.
"Keep up the good work," Bloomberg told volunteers, "We're going to save a lot of lives."
As volunteers sat and noshed on beef skewers, fresh fruit, brownie bites, cheese and crackers, Bloomberg noted that he's plowing money into Democratic races nationwide. The former mayor cited gun attacks on other places of worship, including the 2012 attack on a Sikh temple in Wisconsin that killed six and the church shootings in Sutherland Springs, Texas, in 2017, and Charleston, S.C., in 2015.
What neither he nor the others mentioned was that the gathering took place in the same building where a disgruntled client shot and killed a law clerk in 2016.
Emma Nelson · 612-673-4509

Load-Date: October 30, 2018


End of Documen
t



CRAVAACK: CUT CLIMATE CHANGE FUNDS
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
May 10, 2012 Thursday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2012 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 767 words
Byline: KEVIN DIAZ; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Proposal would affect education programs at Como Zoo and Carleton College.


Body


WASHINGTON - U.S. Rep. Chip Cravaack is leading a Republican effort in the House to block funding for a climate change initiative that provides money to education programs around the nation, including at Carleton College in Northfield and the Como Zoo and Conservatory in St. Paul.
Cravaack's proposal, offered as an amendment to an annual spending bill, made the first-term Minnesota member of Congress the focus of a legislative duel Wednesday over climate change, with Democrats and environmentalists rallying against the GOP measure.
His provision passed the House late Wednesday on a 238-188 vote.
Cravaack's amendment to the Commerce-Justice-Science spending bill would eliminate $10 million in annual funding made nationwide through the National Science Foundation's Climate Change education program.
Cravaack said the money "duplicates the already inherent ability of the [NSF] to fund worthy proposals through its rigorous, peer-reviewed process."
He cited Government Accountability Office (GAO) reports showing a range of overlapping programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics education that are funded by 13 government agencies.
"A redundant global warming program can hardly be justified," he said.
Carleton has received nearly $255,000 through the program since 2010. The Como Zoo is part of a zoo educational network on national climate literacy that has received $1.2 million.
Democrats, Cravaack spar
House Democratic leaders denounced the measure as part of a broader effort to cast doubt on climate change. Scientists overwhelmingly agree that the climate is changing rapidly because of greenhouse gases, but it remains a contentious political issue.
"Rather than taking action to reduce emissions and avoid the worse impacts of climate change, House Republicans have opted to deny the basic science," Rep. Henry Waxman of California, the ranking Democrat on the Energy and Commerce Committee, wrote in a letter to colleagues. "Rep. Chip Cravaack is continuing this head-in-the-sand approach."
Cravaack said his amendment is about duplication, not climate change: "However you feel about global warming -- that is not the debate today. This amendment addresses a duplicative program costing us money we simply do not have."
Cravaack's office did not respond to a request for his position on global warming. Last year he voted for a measure to bar the Environmental Protection Agency from regulating greenhouse gases to address climate change, saying that power should be reserved to Congress.
Environmentalists questioned why his push to end duplication is aimed directly at climate change education programs. "There is very little investment in climate change education," said Patrick Fitzgerald, director of education advocacy for the National Wildlife Federation. Fitzgerald argued that science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education programs cited by Cravaack are not the same as climate change education programs. "He's comparing apples to oranges," Fitzgerald said.
Early election-year battle
The skirmish over the amendment represents one of the first big spending battles of an election-year Congress, many of them echoing the themes of the year's presidential race.
President Obama already has threatened to veto the $51.1 billion spending bill over proposed GOP spending cuts to an array of programs in the Commerce and Justice departments, as well as in other agencies.
Cravaack's amendment would eliminate funding for a national initiative to reach more than 20 million zoo visitors each year with information about climate change. The Como Zoo took part in a planning survey for the project, which is being led by the Chicago-based Climate Literacy Zoo Education Network.
Researchers with the group released a report in April showing that zoo and aquarium visitors are more concerned about climate change than the general public. In announcing the report, Como Zoo Director Michelle Furrer said visitors "are clearly concerned about climate change, and these survey findings give us the opportunity to help visitors adopt greener lifestyles and reduce their environmental footprint."
The grant at Carleton is part of an ongoing nationwide initiative to collect peer-reviewed teaching materials on climate literacy and energy awareness. "What would be lost are additions that come from new projects," said Cathy Manduca, director of Carleton's Science and Education Resource Center. "In climate science, it's important to have new things because climate science itself is evolving very fast."
Kevin Diaz is a correspondent in the Star Tribune Washington Bureau.

Load-Date: May 10, 2012


End of Documen
t



Climate change remedy in farms and forests?
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
November 15, 2018 Thursday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2018 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1053 words
Byline: JOSEPHINE MARCOTTY; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Landscapes could hold more carbon in soil, grass and trees


Body


Managing the nation's landscapes with carbon in mind - from prairies to farms to urban and northern forests - could cut greenhouse gas emissions as much as 21 percent annually, or about equal to the discharge of all cars and trucks on the road today.
And Minnesota is among the states that could do the most: It ranks 8th overall, with the potential to reduce its net carbon emissions by up to a third, according to a study published Wednesday in the journal Science Advances.
The strategy won't solve climate change on its own, said the lead author, Joe Fargione, an ecologist with The Nature Conservancy in Minneapolis. But the study, which measured 21 specific practices, illustrates that such "natural climate solutions" have enormous potential.
"It reduces the risk of catastrophic climate change, which is going to be hard to do from the energy sector alone," he said.
Moreover, they are all changes that can be adopted by individual landowners, homeowners and farmers, or by local and state governments, while providing the added benefits of cleaner water and air and healthier soils, said Bonnie Keeler, a University of Minnesota professor who studies the social value of nature.
"This is not a radical shift in behavior," Keeler said. "It's good land management."
But the shift would come at a steep price for some, at least in the short run. For example, a significant portion of the benefit in Minnesota would come from planting cover crops, which protect bare soil from erosion, consume excess nitrogen and pull carbon from the air. But that's something farmers would have to choose to do. And while use of cover crops such as rye is on the rise, especially to reduce runoff and fertilizer contamination of water, it's a steep climb, said Paul Porter, a U agronomy professor.
Farmers "are not going to do this on vast acreages," at least in the near term, he said. For that to change, he said, "it has to be economical" for farmers, and right now it's not.
The study examined what contributions natural climate solutions could make in achieving the U.S. carbon reduction goals established by the Paris climate accord - emissions that are 26 to 28 percent below 2005 levels by the year 2025.
The authors, 36 researchers from 22 conservation and academic institutions, then estimated the amount of carbon that would be sequestered by 21 different land management practices without reducing the production of food and fiber. The practices included replanting forests, better management of nitrogen and manure, planting cover crops, extending the life of trees before harvesting them for timber, and restoring low-quality croplands to wetlands and prairies.
At most, under one scenario, the country could reduce carbon by 21 percent of the net emissions it produced in 2016. The vast majority would come from reforesting land, for example, that has been lost to urban sprawl, primarily in the northeast and south central regions of the country. That would exclude productive farmland.
"We want to conserve good farmland," Fargione said.
Extending harvest cycles on privately held timber lands would also provide a significant benefit.
Tree stewards
In Minnesota, adopting 11 of the practices could reduce 33.75 percent of the 80 million net tons of carbon the state produces each year. An estimated 50 million tons is already held in the land, primarily in the soils, grasses and forests that make up its primary ecosystems.
"The single biggest thing we need to do is not convert forest to non-forest use," said John Rajala, who manages a family-owned timber and milling company in Deer River, Minn. "Second is to promote long-lived species on as many sites as possible."
Rajala Cos. has been managing its 20,000 acres of timber land with those goals in mind for years. It plants long-lived, harvestable species such as white pine, but also those that will prevail in the warmer and wetter decades to come.
Rajala's company makes durable construction materials and cabinets that can last for decades, rather than short-lived consumer products that contribute to climate change as soon as they get tossed - "so we stop this cycle of throwaway consumerism," he said.
"The products we make are almost as important as the way we manage the forest," Rajala said.
Managing public forest lands, however, can be more complicated. Craig Schmid, deputy director of forestry for the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, said managers do consider what species to plant to ensure a viable future for its 5.6 million acres of forests. And the DNR has recently formed a climate change advisory group. But it does not manage timber harvests for longevity and carbon sequestration, he said. Rather, harvests are driven in part by the needs of Minnesota's forest industry, which depends on younger trees.
Some conservation groups have been critical of the DNR's recent forest management plan, saying it did not do enough to consider the implications of climate change.
"It was a huge missed opportunity," said Don Arnosti, executive director of the Izaak Walton League in Minnesota.
Many of the cost barriers could be addressed with a global carbon market, Fargione said, one that would provide farmers and timber companies with financial credits for practices that sequester it.
"If you were paying for them in the price of carbon, [the measures] would be cost-effective," he said.
Josephine Marcotty · 612-673-7394
REDUCING OUR CARBON FOOTPRINT
Natural climate solutions are proven ways to store and reduce carbon dioxide emissions (CO2e) in the environment. They could reduce carbon emissions by 21 percent in the United States, about equal to what all the cars and trucks on the road produce annually, according to a new study.
Maximum CO2e mitigation potential* (millions of tons per year)
(See the page PDF or microfilm for the complete map.)
*Total amount of carbon reductions possible regardless of cost
Maximum CO2e mitigation potential* (millions of tons per year)
Cover crops: 6.5
Reforestation: 5.9
Alley cropping**: 5.1
Avoided grassland conversion: 4.7
Cropland nutrient management: 3.5
Improved manure management: 0.9
Grassland restoration: 0.4
Urban reforestation: 0.3
Avoided forest conversion: 0.3
*Using carbon reduction data
**Alley cropping is planting rows of trees at wide spacings in fields of other crops or grasses.
Source: Nature4Climate

Load-Date: November 15, 2018


End of Documen
t



Poles apart on climate change in election season
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 14, 2018 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2018 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1OP
Length: 906 words
Byline: LORI STURDEVANT; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


Who are you going to believe about climate change - 91 scientists from 40 countries who draw conclusions from more than 6,000 scientific studies, or the Republican candidate for Congress in Minnesota's First District?
That was the juxtaposition presented quite by coincidence last Monday to this newspaper's Editorial Board. It was the day the Intergovernmenal Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) told the world that dire environmental consequences are just a few decades away if humans don't stop spewing large amounts of carbon-laden gases into the atmosphere. And the day that Jim Hagedorn came to call.
The IPCC report said with italicized high confidence (that's how scientists yell, I believe) that average world temperatures are on track to climb another 0.5 degrees Celsius from today's levels, reaching that level between 2032 and 2050. And they'll keep climbing if nothing is done about human-generated carbon emissions.
Acting now to prevent that post-2050 temperature climb is life-or-death stuff for millions of this planet's creatures, human and otherwise, the report concluded. Things will be bad enough if the temperature increase can be held to 0.5 degrees. Seas will rise, storms will intensify, some species will vanish, some cropland (listen up, Minnesota) will lose its utility.
But real trouble will come if average temperatures go another 0.5 degrees higher in the last half of this century, as models now say they will. The report's litany of consequences is scary stuff. It describes the irreversible loss of ice fields in Antarctica and Greenland and an accompanying sea-level rise that would displace millions of people. The extinction of plants and animals would more than double if average temperatures rise 1.0 degree Celsius from today's levels, it says. Agriculture would collapse in many places, spurring both famine and mass human migration.
Fortunately, the report also sounds a hopeful note. It's not too late to avert a post-2050 catastrophe. "There are a wide range of adaptation options that can reduce the risks of climate change (high confidence)," it said. Many of them require government action, or would benefit from a government nudge. In this situation, the speed of change matters, the IPCC emphasized.
That report was top of mind as the Editorial Board met with candidates for Congress on Monday. First up: Hagedorn, running a third time for the seat being vacated by DFL gubernatorial candidate Tim Walz. He brought a sweeping counterpoint to the IPCC: - a mix of faith-based reassurance (it's in God's hands) and fatalism (nothing meaningful can be done).
"I'm a Christian guy. I believe the world's been heating and cooling since God created it," Hagedorn said. He scoffed at past predictions "that things were going to change, that by now we're supposed to be under water in some places in the United States, that the world was coming to an end." Rather, he said, what's happening now is what the planet has experienced "for generations and generations and generations."
But, he added, whether climate change is "so-called 'man-made' or not, the proposals I've seen out there wouldn't change that trajectory or solve the problem." All they would do is put the U.S. economy at a disadvantage, he argued. Money would be better spent helping dislocated people resettle, he said. (But evidently not here: Hagedorn also wants more restrictions on immigration.)
Hagedorn said he saw no need for federal efforts to improve clean-energy technology, such as electricity storage units. That's up to the private sector, he said. With the tax-aided wind farms that have sprouted in southwestern Minnesota, "we've done our part already." What the nation needs instead is more drilling for crude oil for the sake of energy independence, he said. "The most damaging thing you can do to an economy is drive up energy prices."
Let it be noted that Hagedorn's DFL opponent, former U.S. Assistant Secretary of Defense Dan Feehan, offered a different view to the Editorial Board later that same day. He thinks combating climate change is an urgent matter of national security; that government ought to keep promoting and funding renewable energy development; and that southern Minnesota is nowhere near maxed out on its contribution to a lower-emission future.
By better deploying wind, solar and biofuels, "my vision is that the First District can become energy independent," Feehan said.
As if on cue, the Nobel Prize committee also weighed in on Monday. The winners of this year's prize in economics are William Nordhaus, whose research demonstrated the utility of imposing a tax on carbon emissions, and Paul Romer, who studied how governments can hasten innovation for the sake of big projects such as slowing climate change.
There was one more dot to connect on Monday. Before the day ended, reports arrived about a tropical storm gaining strength in the Gulf of Mexico. Its name: Michael.
By week's end, I was left wondering whether the people who live on the Florida Panhandle would agree with Hagedorn about the worst thing that can befall an economy. And whether the farmers in the First District, inundated by heavy October rains that are delaying an already rain-diminished harvest, are willing to literally bet their farms on Hagedorn's view that government can't do anything meaningful about climate change.
Lori Sturdevant is a Star Tribune editorial writer and columnist. She is at lsturdevant@startribune.com

Load-Date: October 18, 2018


End of Documen
t



Climate change: Argue or adapt
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 14, 2018 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2018 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 796 words
Byline: JENNIFER BROOKS; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


In a normal year, Martin Larsen would have the soybeans harvested by now.
But the new normal for Minnesota farmers is that there is no normal.
This year, it rained and rained and rained, and 90 percent of the beans sat soaking in the fields of his 670-acre family farm outside Byron, Minn. Finally, on Friday, the skies cleared. The soybeans were still too soggy to harvest, but he made some headway on the corn.
Minnesota's climate is changing. Winters aren't as cold as they used to be. It rains more, and the rain comes in heavy bursts that wash away topsoil.
You can argue about it, or you can adapt. Minnesotans like Larsen don't have time to argue.
He switched to no-till farming and planted cover crops to protect his lands from the rains that were washing the nutrients out of the soil.
"It's something we had to do to keep the farm productive for the long run," he said. "I have a 7-year-old son. If he wants to farm, we have to keep the farm in as-good or better shape than it was when we got it."
Last week, climate scientists gave the planet a deadline. Stop burning coal, they warned. Get big into biofuels. Plant as many trees as you can while we still have a few glaciers and coral reefs left.
If we're lucky, and if every government on Earth cooperates and sacrifices, then maybe - just maybe - we could limit global warming to a tolerable 1.5 degrees and fend off mass extinctions, melting ice caps, flooded coastlines, droughts, floods and famine.
While the planet chews on that, Minnesota is trying to cope with just how much its climate has changed already.
State agencies, law enforcement, academics, and health experts teamed up to review those changes last year. Their report, Adapting to Climate Change in Minnesota, highlights how governments and citizens are scrambling, not to prepare for a grim worst-case future scenario, but for the climate right now - where one day the air is choked with smoke from western wildfires and the next day a chunk of highway is washing away in a flash flood.
"Minnesota is getting warmer. It's getting wetter," said Kenny Blumenfeld, senior climatologist with the Minnesota State Climate Office. "We're already outside the historical range of temperatures."
You can argue, but you're probably sneezing too hard. Ragweed season lasts three weeks longer than it used to.
Communities are widening storm sewers to cope with more rain and more violent storms. Since 2002, the state has weathered eight "mega-rain" events, where the skies opened and half a foot or more of rain poured down on everything within a thousand square miles below. It happened twice in summer of 2016 alone.
The warmer winters bring more freeze-thaw cycles that tear up the roads and turn waterways briny with road salt runoff. State and local road repair budgets are adjusting accordingly.
So far, Minnesota has been spared an increase in scorching summer heat waves, Blumenfeld said. That won't last.
"We have not had an increase in days above 90 [degrees]," he said. "We should enjoy that. ... The science tells us that by 2040, 2050, we're going to start seeing a noticeable increase in the frequency of heat waves."
The winters are where it's gotten weird. It's been a decade since temperatures dipped to 50 below in Minnesota, even during the brutal polar vortex years that froze Lake Superior. Days that hit 40 below are getting rarer too.
Warmer winters sound appealing. Unless you're a fan of ice fishing, or winter sports, or the state's $16 billion outdoor recreation industry. Good luck scheduling your ice fishing tournament, winter festival or ski tournament around whipsaw weather forecasts. Remember last year, when International Falls warmed up to 50 degrees in February?
The tamarack trees are dying. The winters don't get cold enough anymore to kill hungry eastern larch beetles. You can argue about climate change, but state forestry officials don't have time to argue. When they plant saplings, they plant for the world 60 years in the future. They're seeing a future Minnesota that won't be a hospitable climate for aspen or paper birch or tamarack or black spruce.
Arguing really isn't the most productive thing you could be doing right now. Because Minnesota's climate is starting to look more like St. Louis, Missouri's, and armadillos are extending their range northward and some of them have reached Wisconsin, and do we really want to live in a Minnesota that's an armadillo habitat?
"What's really frustrating for me over the years is how political climate change has become," said David Thornton, assistant commissioner for air policy at the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. "The climate is going to change anyway. ... We need to think about that."
jennifer.brooks@startribune.com · 612-673-4008 Follow Jennifer on Twitter: @stribrooks

Load-Date: October 18, 2018


End of Documen
t



Music warms to climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
June 2, 2015 Tuesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2015 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 641 words
Byline: JOSEPHINE MARCOTTY; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: U student Dan Crawford has enlisted a string quartet to illustrate scientific data.


Body


Take the coldest year Minnesota ever had, 1883, and assign it a musical note - say, "D." Do that with the average annual temperature for every year since 1880 in the four northern regions of the globe and what you get in the end is - climate change for a string quartet.
Five University of Minnesota students are receiving national attention for that composition, especially Dan Crawford, a graduating senior who translated the global temperature data into music and put the project together.
Not surprisingly, the composition, "Planetary Bands, Warming World," starts low and ends up high, especially the violin that plays the music of the Arctic region, which is warming faster than the rest of the world. The average annual temperature for the 44th- through 64th-degree latitudes, which includes Minnesota, peaked at 36.1 degrees in 2007. As transcribed for the piece, it is two octaves higher than the corresponding 1883 temperature.
The string quartet is Crawford's second climate change composition. The first one, completed in 2013 at the suggestion of his science professor, also played across the world and was picked up by the Weather Channel and the Dot Earth blog in the New York Times. In that one, "A Song of Our Warming Planet," Crawford played notes representing the average annual surface temperature for the entire Earth, from 1880 on, a rare marriage of science and art.
But not a great piece of music. Crawford had to use almost every full and half-note in order to cover the entire range of temperature changes on his cello.
"It got the point across - it was really scary to listen to," he recalled in an interview. But musicians complained "that it wasn't very musical," he said.
So for "Planetary Bands, Warming World," he stayed in the major keys and took advantage of the range of four stringed instruments.
The result is a sad, sometimes discordant composition that ends as the violins fade away at the highest notes.
But it's an excellent teaching tool, said Scott St. George, Crawford's climatology professor, who came up with the idea in the first place.
He wanted a way to express climate change "without defaulting to some guy in front of a slide showing a graph," St. George said. "A lot of people don't think it's very interesting."
Hearing the world change
St. George and Crawford were shocked when the first piece swept around the world after it was posted on the website for the U's Institute on the Environment (IonE). Crawford was even interviewed on Skype for a Japanese television show.
"People were really interested in this new approach to the data," Crawford said.
The second composition tells an equally important but more complex story about the warming world. "That different regions of the globe are experiencing climate change differently," Crawford said.
Even St. George found it enlightening.
"I've learned things about the pattern of climate change that I don't think I would have realized just looking at a chart," he said. In 1941, for example, the note for the Arctic region leaps upward while the rest of the northern hemisphere was not unusually warm that year.
"I would not have noticed it if I hadn't heard the first violin take a jump up," St. George said. But then at other points in the composition the instruments move together, an indication that each region is warming at the same rate.
"You can hear that synchronicity," he said.
Crawford, who grew up in Madison, Wis., started out at the U thinking he would major in engineering. But after taking St. George's class as a freshman, he quickly changed his mind, and wound up with a double major in geography and environmental sciences, policy and management.
Eventually he wants to go to graduate school to study climate change, but for now he wants to find a job and save some money.
"And give my brain a break," he said.
Josephine Marcotty · 612-673-7394

Load-Date: June 4, 2015


End of Documen
t



Climate change will affect health, state says
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
February 8, 2015 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2015 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6B
Length: 384 words
Byline: DAVID CHANEN; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Report sees worsening health problems with rising heat, unpredictable weather patterns.


Body


Minnesotans will suffer from more asthma, respiratory problems, cardiovascular disease and such bug-borne diseases as West Nile virus and Lyme disease as climate change takes hold across the Upper Midwest, according to a new report from the Minnesota Health Department.
It's the latest in a series of "vulnerability assessments" that Gov. Mark Dayton ordered from his Cabinet to prepare Minnesota for the inevitable. The 98-page Minnesota Climate and Health Profile Report says that health risks are especially high for people who lack "climate resilience" due to age, income, residence or numerous other vulnerability factors that influence whether an individual can thrive in a changing environment.
The department's Climate and Health Program established six goals outlined in a strategic plan for the Health Department. These goals will guide priorities and funding decisions for activities to minimize climate change effects on the health of all Minnesotans.
Some of the goals include:
· Research, track and report on the public health effects of climate change.
· Enhance planning for emergency and disaster response and recovery to effectively protect the public's health against climate change-related disasters.
· Increase the public health system's capacity to respond and adapt to the public health impacts of climate change.
"Minnesota has gotten warmer, and precipitation patterns have become more unpredictable," the report concluded. "According to climate projections for the state, these trends are likely to continue with wide-ranging repercussions for the health and well-being of the population."
The next steps include addressing data and research gaps to reach out to vulnerable populations. For example, limited data exists to help characterize all effects from flooding on Minnesotans, including financial, physical and emotional influences on health and well-being.
The report also foresees officials teaming up with sectors and disciplines that may be relatively new to public health, and borrowing from other states' and municipalities' successes.
"Minnesota public health professionals can learn from these experiences while drawing on resources and partnerships here in the state to select the most effective interventions for sustaining health," the report said.
David Chanen · 612-673-4465

Load-Date: February 9, 2015


End of Documen
t



General Mills joins push to combat climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 2, 2015 Friday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2015 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 2D
Length: 237 words
Byline: MIKE HUGHLETT; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


General Mills Inc. has joined nine other food companies in addressing climate change before a large United Nations gathering on the issue later this year.
In a letter to U.S. and global leaders, the food companies' CEOs say that if action isn't taken now, "we risk not only today's livelihoods, but those of future generations."
The companies note that climate change is a menace to the world's food production system. "Climate change is bad for farmers and agriculture," the letter says. "Drought, flooding and hotter growing conditions threaten the world's food supply and contribute to food insecurity."
The companies include Nestlé USA, Unilever, Kellogg, Stonyfield Farm, Danone Dairy North America, Ben & Jerry's (which is owned by Unilever), Clif Bar, Mars Inc. and New Belgium Brewing Co. The letter marks the first time the food industry has come together to address climate change.
In December, world leaders are scheduled to meet in Paris for the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The goal of the 11-day event is to reach a new international agreement on climate change with the aim of tamping down global warming.
The food companies say they will "re-energize" their efforts to ensure their supply chains become more sustainable and will advocate for government to set "clear, achievable, measurable and enforceable science-based targets for carbon emission reductions."
Mike Hughlett · 612-673-7003

Load-Date: October 2, 2015


End of Documen
t



Critics come with territory for U climate change prof
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
May 13, 2014 Tuesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2014 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 739 words
Byline: JON TEVLIN; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


Paul Bolstad, a professor in the University of Minnesota's Forest Resources Department, was one of the many authors of the National Climate Assessment released last week.
The report said that climate change was already having an impact on the world, with more extreme weather and rising seas. The report was also pretty clear in stating that humans were one of the main culprits.
So when I met Bolstad for coffee near his St. Paul office recently, I had to ask if he was one of those "greedy alarmists" and "money-hungry scientists" I had heard about on certain news channels.
Bolstad laughed.
"Maybe the Trojans thought Cassandra was alarmist too, until the Greeks started sliding out of the wooden horse," he said.
It turns out, Bolstad can look dire predictions in the face with a decent sense of humor.
The peer-reviewed Third National Climate Assessment, which included input from about 300 scientists and 13 federal agencies, argues that climate change is already causing substantial financial, health and ecological harm. The report pointed to droughts in the West and flood damage to roads in the East. Bolstad co-authored one of the chapters.
As Bolstad and I talked, severe storms were building just a few miles from us. Were they more signs of an eventual apocalypse?
No, Bolstad said. Using one anecdote to predict climate "works both ways."
"Some people see a huge storm and say it's due to global warming, but you don't know," Bolstad said. "It's like saying Barry Bonds' 400th home run was due to steroids. You don't know."
"One anecdote, or one study, doesn't mean anything in science," said Bolstad. "But through hundreds of studies you build a narrative of how the world works."
"You can always find one study, or one scientist, who disagrees" with a finding on climate change, Bolstad said. "It's the meta-analysis that matters. Every objection to human-caused climate change has been rejected."
The argument among the vast majority of scientists is no longer whether climate change is happening, or whether humans are partly to blame, "it's over how much we are causing it, or over whether doing something about it is too expensive."
Those who claim scientists rig studies to come up with the result they want simply don't understand how science works. If your data is bad, another scientist will come along to say so, and their criticism is added to the climate change narrative.
Scientists become more well known by debunking bad science than by going along with it. Bolstad points out that even the oil companies employ climate change scientists to help them assess the financial challenges coming. As for accusations that those advocating climate change are greedy, Bolstad says his students who go to work for corporations can make triple his salary.
I told Bolstad that one poll showed that only about 36 percent of Americans are worried about climate change. He wasn't surprised.
"I don't know why the public believes what it believes," said Bolstad. "They think it's related to politics, but it's not. The earth's climate doesn't care what you believe. A lot of people just have more immediate concerns and don't think about climate much."
He even has a relative who disagrees with him on climate change. "I just say you are wrong on this, but I won't tell you how to be a dentist, and we agree to disagree."
Bolstad can't say exactly when Minnesota will look radically different. But if climate change continues, he expects the state to eventually look more like central Missouri or Illinois. Aspen and spruce will give way to oaks. Trout will be replaced by more bass. Water could be a problem, but probably not for a long time.
Studies like the one released last week are essential to helping us plan for the future, Bolstad said. It will determine everything from whether we need to increase the size of culverts, or put a flood wall around Miami or calculate whether we need to increase subsidies for poor people who can't afford rising energy prices.
Despite the sometimes grim nature of his science findings, Bolstad remains cautiously optimistic. He thinks changes by individuals (yep, he drives a Prius) and both local and national government bodies can all make a difference.
"I think people will adjust when they have to," said Bolstad. "It's a shame there will be a lot of damage before then. I don't lose sleep over it, but it could be better."
jtevlin@startribune.com · 612-673-1702 Follow Jon on Twitter: @jontevlin

Load-Date: May 14, 2014


End of Documen
t



State asks insurers: Are you ready for climate change?
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
August 11, 2013 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2013 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3B
Length: 619 words
Byline: BILL McAULIFFE; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: It requires survey response, which will be available to the public.


Body


Minnesota has joined four other states in requiring its insurance companies to discuss how extensively they've prepared for climate change.
About 70 companies have until Aug. 31 to respond to an eight-question survey. The questionnaire, developed by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), focuses on the assessment of risk associated with climate change. However, it also seeks information on whether insurance companies are working to reduce their own greenhouse gas emissions, have altered their investment strategies in response to climate change, or have encouraged policyholders to reduce losses caused by "climate change-influenced events."
State Insurance Commissioner Mike Rothmann said Minnesota joined California, Connecticut, New York and Washington in the survey in order to help develop a broader base of information about possible disaster coverage. While the other states face risks of coastal storms that Minnesota does not, Rothmann said Minnesota firms are vulnerable to tornadoes, severe storms and river floods, which some climate models suggest are increasing with a warming climate.
"My perception is that we've seen some frequency changes with those events," Rothmann said. "We want to make sure companies and policyholders have the best protection possible."
Minnesota's first billion-dollar disaster year was 1998, the year of devastating tornadoes in St. Peter and Comfrey. The $1.5 billion in losses were greater than those for the previous 40 years combined, said Mark Kulda, spokesman for the Insurance Federation of Minnesota. In three of the past five years, Minnesota's insurance payouts for weather disasters were among the top three in the nation, he said. Since 1998, the average annual premium for Minnesota homeowners' insurance has jumped from $368 to $960.
Identifying, pricing the risk
Unlike many traditional businesses, some insurance companies, particularly European "reinsurance" companies that insure insurance companies themselves, have been outspoken in putting a price tag on climate change by connecting disasters with it.
The president of the Reinsurance Association of America recently told a Senate committee that the insurance industry is "at great financial peril" if it doesn't understand climate change science or the potential ramifications of a warming atmosphere.
The NAIC developed its survey in 2009, noting what it viewed as a clear link between climate change and the viability of insurance companies, as well as its effect on premiums. Earlier this year, Ceres, a Boston-based organization that advocates environmental sustainability in business and helped the NAIC develop the survey, analyzed the 2012 survey results from California, New York and Washington and determined that only 23 of 184 insurance companies had comprehensive plans to accommodate the risks of climate change.
At least one Minnesota insurer said climate change and its effects are not clearly enough understood to prompt higher insurance premiums.
Stuart Henderson, CEO of Western National Insurance Co., which writes $40 million worth of homeowners insurance in Minnesota, said his company is regularly assessing its exposure to all risks, and will adjust to climate change if necessary.
He also criticized the NAIC survey for questions that he believes go beyond liability and advocate strategies to blunt climate change, adding that he believes climate trends are uncertain.
"What are we doing about emissions? We don't have emissions," he said of his company.
It's unclear when Minnesota's survey results will be compiled. Meanwhile, several years of survey results from companies in other states are available at www.startribune.com/a2418.
Bill McAuliffe · 612-673-7646

Load-Date: August 13, 2013


End of Documen
t



Big firms, U join to find way to feed planet
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 17, 2020 Saturday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2020 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6B
Length: 513 words
Byline: KRISTEN LEIGH PAINTER; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Called MBOLD, the coalition is focused on sustainable growth of the food industry.


Body


Slowing or reversing the effects of climate change is a massive undertaking. Leaders at some of Minnesota's largest companies hope that together they can have a more meaningful impact.
On Friday - World Food Day - a coalition of food, agriculture and retail companies outlined several areas on which their new partnership, called MBOLD, will initially focus. Soil health, water stewardship and plastic packaging are the environmental issues most directly related to the industries represented by the companies.
"We really need to feed a planet of soon-to-be 10 billion people and we need to do it in a way that's sustainable and friendly to the Earth," said General Mills Chief Executive Jeff Harmening, co-chair of MBOLD. "You realize that no one company, or one business, or one university can accomplish something that complex on their own, so what you need is a coalition of the willing to come together to address that."
Other regional organizations, such as Grow North, have focused on improving collaboration between Minnesota's wealth of food and ag players with a goal of spurring innovation and entrepreneurship. MBOLD is more specifically aimed at addressing global problems that threaten the food supply chain in the future.
"Clearly, the changing climate is the biggest issue weighing on the [food] system today," Harmening said.
The new entity sits under the economic-development umbrella of Greater MSP. As such, the group is also focused on attracting and keeping a talented workforce in the region.
The group's focus on soil health and water stewardship is a logical next step as several of the member companies have individually made commitments to expanding use of regenerative agricultural practices within their supply chains.
Co-chair Stephanie Lundquist, president of food and beverage for Target Corp., said they are also working on creating a circular economy for plastic films used to make shopping bags and food package liners.
Less than 4% of these plastics are recycled in the U.S. The group will work toward developing a closed-loop system where those plastics have more markets after their initial use.
In the short term, the coalition said it is looking at solutions for food insecurity brought on by the economic crisis of COVID-19.
The participating companies are supporting MBOLD financially, Harmening said.
JoAnne Berkenkamp, MBOLD's managing director, said the organization intends to establish benchmarks to measure their progress on their goals.
"We're still in the very early stages, but have already started some of this work with partners like McKinsey providing great guidance and support," Berkenkamp said. As the group takes shape, she said, "we'll be able to build more specific metrics and will share those openly once they're in place.
Executives and leaders from Cargill, Compeer Financial, Ecolab, Hormel Foods, Land O'Lakes, Schwan's Co., the University of Minnesota, the Agricultural Utilization Research Institute, the Minnesota AgriGrowth Council, Grow North and McKinsey & Co. round out the coalition.
Kristen Leigh Painter · 612-673-4767

Load-Date: October 17, 2020


End of Documen
t



The ABCs of climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
November 6, 2012 Tuesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2012 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3B
Length: 739 words
Byline: BILL McAULIFFE; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Three speakers are on the bill for the U's annual Kuehnast Lecture, billed "Mini-Climate School."


Body


If Minnesotans are like their next-door neighbors, they're facing an identity crisis with climate change, says a top Canadian climatologist.
"When the Soviet Union lost Georgia and the Balkans, Russia became the coldest country," said David Phillips, author and spokesman for Environment Canada, noting Canada's drop into second place two decades ago. "I thought it was good news, but Canadians were so disappointed. Who wants to be in second place?"
Phillips will outline the impact of a warming climate on Canada and, by slight extension, Minnesota as one of three speakers Thursday in the 20th annual Kuehnast Lecture at the University of Minnesota. The lecture is endowed by the family of Minnesota's first state climatologist, Earl Kuehnast.
This year's event has been billed as "Mini-Climate School," to capitalize on a topic that, while largely absent from the presidential campaign, has grabbed the public's attention, particularly in the week following superstorm Sandy.
"This program should improve our climate literacy and should improve our understanding of what climate change implications have in store for us," said Mark Seeley, University of Minnesota Extension climatologist and chairman of the Kuehnast Endowment Committee, who added that pointing to climate change as a cause of Sandy is "an oversimplification."
Other speakers will be Harold Brooks, research meteorologist with NOAA's National Severe Storm Laboratory, who will speak on climate change and thunderstorms, and Sue Grimmond, a geography professor at Kings College in London who will discuss research into urban climate change.
In a phone interview Monday, Phillips said he doesn't want to worry people about climate change. Because so much warming is already locked in place by long-lasting carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, individuals and leaders need to focus instead on how to adapt to it, he said. That means spending a lot of money beefing up infrastructure and the capabilities to respond to extreme conditions, including both floods and droughts, which are expected to occur more frequently, he said.
"The truth is, even if we stopped all traffic and grounded all planes, the climate will still change," he said. "We need to prepare for it, so that little hit won't become a major blow. You can't prevent the hazard, but you can prevent it from becoming a disaster."
Brooks and Phillips will both touch on how while climate "normals" may not change dramatically, extremes such as storm or drought frequency and intensities might.
Brooks has found, for example, that tornado season in the U.S. starts earlier than it used to, but has been following unpredictable patterns through the spring and summer. Similarly, the trend appears to be toward more bursts of strong tornadoes -- "You may not have as many tornado days, but if you have a day, it's going to be huge," he said -- rather than seasons that see a steady run of tornadoes of all strengths.
Though conventional wisdom has it that a warmer climate, which carries more water vapor, will generate more and heavier thunderstorms, some research has found that it could also reduce the size of hail, Brooks said. Hail forms as droplets rise in a cloud, but if the ground is warmer, Brooks said, the hail will have to grow at a level higher in the atmosphere, and fall through a greater distance of warm air. That will allow it to melt more before it hits the ground.
The "Mini-Climate School" is being patterned after the university's popular "Mini Medical School" a lecture series with medical researchers. Seeley said that, and the climate focus, helped attract Thomson Reuters, the Science Museum of Minnesota, the Minnesota Regional Sustainability Partnership Program, the UM Extension and the U's Department of Soil, Water and Climate as co-sponsors. They have joined long-time sponsor Sigma Xi, the scientific research society.
Seeley said the event will also be live-streamed and recorded for the first time.
Bill McAuliffe - 612-673-7646
20TH ANNUAL KUEHNAST LECTURE
The "Mini-Climate School" will feature lecturers on climate change. Admission is free.
When: 1 to 5 p.m. Thursday
Where: University of Minnesota St. Paul Student Center Theater, 2017 Buford Av., St. Paul.
Who: David Phillips, spokesman for Environment Canada; Sue Grimmond, professor of Geography, Kings College, London; Harold Brooks, research meteorologist with NOAA's National Severe Storms Laboratory.
More info: startribune.com/a1871

Load-Date: November 6, 2012


End of Documen
t



Pawlenty and Steger kick off climate talks in Ely; The forum was the first of several for the adventurer and the governor, who are focusing on possible local effects of climate change.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
January 5, 2008 Saturday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2008 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 572 words
Byline: Larry Oakes, Staff Writer
Dateline: Ely, Minn. 
Body


The boreal forest surrounding this town, defining its rugged character and sustaining its wilderness economy, is one of the precious assets Minnesota stands to lose if humans fail to reduce emissions contributing to global warming, a scientist warned Friday at a forum hosted by Gov. Tim Pawlenty and explorer Will Steger.
"With a doubling of [carbon dioxide], our forests will shift 200 to 400 miles northward," University of Minnesota forest ecologist Lee Frelich told about 250 people who crowded into the auditorium at Vermilion Community College. "There would be a tsunami of grass from the west. Minnesota would end up without much forest at all."
The gathering was the first of several Pawlenty and Steger have agreed to host statewide, focusing mostly on the potential local effects of climate change. The Republican governor and the dog-sledding adventurer joined forces last fall on the issue, with Pawlenty declaring it "one of the most important issues of our time."
Minnesota should seize the chance to benefit economically from solutions, Pawlenty said, creating "green collar" jobs.
These could involve clean-energy technologies such as wind, solar, and bio-mass.
"Finally we're waking up to the fact that global warming is real, as evidenced by the audience here today," Steger told the gathering in his hometown of 3,500 people, where "eco-tourism" is a pillar of the economy.
U.S. Sen. Amy Klobuchar, whose grandparents lived in Ely, agreed that Minnesota should seize the opportunity to become a leader in combating climate change.
"We've brought the world everything from the Post-it note to the pacemaker," Klobuchar said. "I see this as our next major challenge."
Ely wilderness outfitter Steve Piragis, citing the wind storm that mowed downed millions of trees in the nearby Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness a few years ago and has contributed to major forest fires, said the potential problems from climate change outweigh any potential advantages, such as longer summers.
"Can we afford to say the blowdown wasn't related to climate change?" Piragis said. "I don't think so."
Can states work together?
Noting that citizens don't need to wait for their government to lead, Piragis posed another question: "Wouldn't it be great if Ely could become the first town in America to have every lightbulb in town be fluorescent?"
Pawlenty said that in the absence of strong national leadership, action by individual states, combined with multistate compacts, have the potential to become "de facto national policy."
J. Drake Hamilton, science and policy director for a nonprofit group called Fresh Energy and the conference moderator, challenged citizens to take action that they'll be able to defend 20 years from now.
"Our children will ask, `What did you do?' " she said, adding that the best answer would be: "We did everything we could - and it worked."
Pawlenty said he still hopes, schedule permitting, to rendezvous with Steger during the explorer's planned trip to the Canadian Arctic this spring to see the shrinking ice floes that demonstrate the effects of climate change in that region.
He said that a lack of 100 percent certainty about climate change and its causes should no longer be an excuse to do nothing.
"Suppose the whole thing is a hoax," Pawlenty said. "The worst thing we'll do in the process is clean up the world and leave a better planet for our children and grandchildren."
Larry Oakes - 218-727-7344

Graphic

 
MAP
PHOTO

Load-Date: January 14, 2008


End of Documen
t



Walz takes charge on climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
December 13, 2019 Friday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 568 words
Highlight: After setback in legislative session, executive order will at least keep Minnesota moving.


Body


Thwarted by Senate Republicans on his climate agenda in the previous legislative session, Gov. Tim Walz recently took a different - and needed - form of action: an executive order that will continue pushing this state toward emission reduction goals set more than a decade ago under a Republican governor.
While making some progress, Minnesota has been falling behind on goals established by Republican Gov. Tim Pawlenty in 2007. What Walz is doing is important not only as a way to forge ahead despite partisan resistance, but also to demonstrate that commitments to long-range goals often require persistence that spans years, changes in administrations and majorities. It was the kind of commitment that was required to create and sustain MinnesotaCare, which was then a nation-leading initiative to expand health care coverage.
Walz's order will form a subcabinet on climate change with representatives from a dozen related state agencies and led by state Pollution Control Agency Commissioner Laura Bishop. The order also creates an advisory council that will draw from across the state for a citizen group that can brainstorm the best ways to tackle the single-biggest threat to this planet. Bishop has said that benchmarks will be set on emission reductions, flood mitigation and other resiliency efforts.
Can Minnesota alone stave off the changes that are already upon us? No. But this state's best efforts, in concert with others, may mitigate the worst of the effects, contributing to the sustainability of the environment this state depends on, and hopefully drive others to do the same.
It would be refreshing to see all sides come together to put forward their best ideas. There was an attempt at a "Clean Energy First" plan in the Legislature last session that had as its chief goal a requirement that electric utilities turn to clean energy sources first. Unfortunately, it too ran aground over the same problem that has beset so many issues of late - stubborn adherence to separate goals that usually produces little but gridlock.
In a move that reflects a more bipartisan spirit, Walz recently appointed Mike Bull of the Center for Energy and Environment - which helped create the Clean Energy First plan - to the governor's Council on Biofuels. Bull helped develop the 2005 biofuel legislation for the Pawlenty administration, which set in motion the reduced carbon emission goals that the state is now struggling to meet.
Walz, who is chairman of the National Governors' Biofuels Coalition, has said he considers climate change "an existential challenge." He is far from alone in that assessment. The zero carbon emissions by 2050 goal he supported earlier this year is becoming an increasingly common benchmark, shared by 70 countries and more than 100 cities around the world.
A number of those countries are meeting now, at the United Nations climate change conference that began earlier this month in Madrid and ends Friday. Regretfully, President Donald Trump skipped the conference and has formally begun the process of withdrawing the U.S. from the Paris climate agreement. But that didn't mean there was no U.S. presence in Madrid. In a show of support, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi attended with a delegation that included Rep. Betty McCollum, D-Minn. Minnesota youth activists also made their support known.
It's time to put the bickering aside and unite in the face of a common threat to all.

Load-Date: December 13, 2019


End of Documen
t



GREEN BULWARK VS. CLIMATE CHANGE
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
May 24, 2017 Wednesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2017 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 844 words
Byline: JOSEPHINE MARCOTTY; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Scientists are identifying planting spots for trees that will withstand shifting forces


Body


If you want to plant a pine tree that might survive the climate upheavals that are already remaking northern Minnesota's boreal forest, where should it go?
Scientists from the Nature Conservancy and elsewhere now think they know. This summer they're embarking on a project to plant 400 acres with cold-loving evergreens like jack pine and tamarack in carefully selected "conifer strongholds" - places that they predict will stay cooler or wetter or have better soil, increasing the chances that a few of each species will survive for the next generation as Minnesota grows warmer.
"We are trying to get us in better shape for the centuries to come," said Meredith Cornett, a forest scientist with the Nature Conservancy in Minnesota who is heading up the project.
The aim is to preserve northern forest species - not just the trees but also the mosaic of plants and animals that rely on them - to maintain biodiversity.
Both will be exceedingly difficult thanks to a double whammy of the region's past and its future.
Conifers like white and jack pine, white cedar, and tamarack once made up two-thirds of Minnesota's northern forest. But thanks to logging, development and the deer that followed both, they've declined to about half, and aspen have become just as common as conifers.
Now, climate change is forcing a different kind of evolution on the southern, most vulnerable, edge of the boreal forest. The giant, long-living pines are disappearing, replaced by more southern species like red maple as tree species across the country move in response to rapid changes in temperature and moisture brought on by 100 years of rising carbon levels in the atmosphere.
A study of 86 eastern tree species published last week by Purdue University scientists found that many have already migrated west in response to increased rainfall in the central part of the country, and north in response to higher average temperatures.
Climate scientists predict that, even if global carbon emissions are held to the rates agreed upon in the Paris Climate Accord, average temperatures will rise by 2 to 4 degrees Fahrenheit by the end of this century. That means the pines of northern Minnesota would give way to a hardwood and grass ecosystem, said Lee Frelich, a University of Minnesota professor who studies climate change and forests.
If that's what happens, then the conifer stronghold will work, he said. But if carbon emissions and climate change continue to accelerate, then in time, northern Minnesota will instead look a lot like Kansas, Frelich said, and no boreal species will survive long-term.
Cornett hopes to provide conifers more time on the Minnesota landscape no matter what happens.
She and foresters from the University of Minnesota and elsewhere have identified 30 such strongholds, totaling 400 acres, in the forests north of Duluth and in the St. Louis River watershed, where they will plant seedlings this year. Next year they plan to plant 50,000 more at other sites in northeast Minnesota.
Cornett and her fellow researchers are relying on a hugely dense set of historic data that includes temperature, humidity, elevation, proximity to water and land use to identify spots in today's forest that can become strongholds for the cold-loving trees. That would include, for example, the north side of a slope or a low-lying wetland area.
Those spots already exist in other parts of Minnesota, Frelich said. For example, there's a low-lying tamarack bog in the western suburbs of Minneapolis that exists because, for some reason, colder air is funneled there. And in southwest Minnesota, a stand of balsam fir is an island in a sea of grass and row crops because it sits on a steep north-facing slope inundated with unusually cold groundwater, he said.
The conifer stronghold data comes from a much bigger effort by the Nature Conservancy to map and identify areas across the national landscape that are most likely to promote biodiversity in the future. In short, rather than tracking and protecting places because of the species that are there, it focuses on geology. A limestone valley, for example, will be home to a different set of species than a granite mountain no matter what the climate.
"Species are important, but they are going to change over time," said Mark Anderson, the Boston Nature Conservancy scientist who is heading the project nationally. "We want to conserve these stages so they have a place to thrive."
The East Coast mapping is complete, and the Great Lakes region - which includes Minnesota - is underway. Anderson said the difference between the two is striking. In the east, for example, changes in elevation and topography can create micro climates and ecosystems. In the flatter Midwest, water, wetlands and river systems drive biodiversity, he said. But the immense expanses of agricultural land form a kind of barrier to tree migration, making it far more difficult for species to evolve and move with the climate.
"It's powerful," he said. "It gives us a way to think about conservation in a changing world."
Josephine Marcotty · 612-673-7394

Load-Date: May 25, 2017


End of Documen
t



Minneapolis fund recognizes efforts to fight climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
November 21, 2019 Thursday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3B
Length: 664 words
Byline: PAUL WALSH; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: More than $240,000 in requests were received.


Body


A Minneapolis fund capped off its first year of awarding grants with recognition of three community organizations for their creative efforts to counter climate change.
The Minneapolis Climate Action and Racial Equity Fund, a partnership of the city of Minneapolis, the Minneapolis Foundation and the McKnight Foundation, issues grants for community-driven initiatives and projects that show results in reducing greenhouse gas emissions through energy efficiency, renewable energy and other means.
The fund received more than $240,000 in requests from 11 applicants in this second round of grants in its inaugural year. Applications were reviewed by a committee of staff members from city government and the two foundations as well as residents who serve on city environmental working committees.
"These grants demonstrate it is possible, and imperative, to attack the climate and equity crisis together," said R.T. Rybak, president and CEO of the Minneapolis Foundation.
The Lake Street Council and the West Bank Business Association received $25,000 in recognition of cutting greenhouse gas emissions by helping businesses adjust to changes in public transportation and ensure that carbon-free options are accessible to residents and visitors.
"We regularly hear from small-business owners that they are concerned about the reduced availability of cheap and plentiful parking in our commercial districts in coming years as we shift to a less car-dependent community," said Allison Sharkey, executive director of the Lake Street Council.
Sharkey said the grant will allow her council and the West Bank Business Association to "help small-business owners take actions to ensure that they don't lose customers and continue to thrive."
"We plan to help businesses work together to optimize the management of the parking that they do control," she said. "We'll also help businesses implement incentive programs for employees and customers to arrive by transit, foot, bike or scooter."
She also pointed out that Lake Street will benefit in the coming years from the B Line Bus Rapid Transit, which will travel along the thoroughfare and provide faster service.
"We'll ensure that business owners and employees have the opportunity to [influence] the design of these transit projects, so that they work well for everyone in our community."
The other recipients announced last week:
· Black Visions Collective, $25,000 for its development of an environmental justice leadership panel composed of people of color and Indigenous leaders. The collective is seeking to recruit people to lead campaigns in influencing public policies affecting the environment.
· Dream of Wild Health, $15,000 in recognition of its Upper Midwest Indigenous Seed Keepers Network, a database service that catalogs and shares vital information about seeds from across the region. The network partners with tribes and Native American organizations to develop training in growing, protecting, preserving and sharing indigenous seeds.
These seeds promote climate change resilience by supporting the ability of Native American communities to grow and eat locally, reducing their dependence on the industrial food system and lowering their carbon footprint.
Dream of Wild Health Executive Director Neely Snyder said the seeds were gifted by elders, seed keepers or their ancestors and a number of tribes, and that her organization has staff to care for seeds, which are an important part of Native American history.
"Increased capacity allows us to continue to steward the seeds for generations to come," Snyder said. "This funding supports the efforts of our dedicated staff who educate our youth and families about the importance of seed preservation and the effects of climate change - and how our Indigenous communities are most vulnerable - in a culturally relevant way."
The fund's next grant round is expected to open in early 2020. For more information, visit minneapolisfoundation.org/grants/other-funding.
Paul Walsh · 612-673-4482

Load-Date: November 29, 2019


End of Documen
t



Low-income Mpls. neighborhoods to get help mitigating climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 30, 2019 Tuesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 838 words
Byline: KELLY SMITH; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Grants will fund energy audits and promotion of car sharing, clean energy.


Body


Three Minnesota nonprofits are the first beneficiaries of a new philanthropic fund aimed at reducing greenhouse gases and other climate change effects in diverse, low-income Minneapolis neighborhoods.
On Monday, the Minneapolis Foundation announced the initial grantees - Minnesota Interfaith Power & Light, MN Renewable Now and Hourcar - for its new partnership with the McKnight Foundation and the city of Minneapolis.
The three will receive nearly $70,000 for projects that include energy audits, community outreach for electric car-sharing hubs and promotion of clean-energy sources.
The new fund, which totals more than $122,000, started with a $100,000 contribution from McKnight.
"Right now there's an urgency to take action on climate change," said R.T. Rybak, CEO of the Minneapolis Foundation and a former Minneapolis mayor. "We have not done anything like this before."
While foundations are directing more money toward environmental projects, most grants have gone to large-scale initiatives, not hyperlocal community projects like the ones supported by this new fund, Rybak said.
The Minneapolis Foundation, one of the largest community foundations in Minnesota, has increased its focus on environmental issues, holding two community meetings on the topic in the past year.
The foundation, which distributed more than $80 million in the last year, said about 10% of its funds from donors focused on environmental issues in 2017.
"The climate challenge is unique, but this allows Minneapolis to do more than its part," Rybak said. "Climate is increasingly important and is increasingly important to our donors."
Nonprofits are also working to decrease health disparities in north Minneapolis, where the Near North and Camden neighborhoods have among the highest obesity rates in Hennepin County.
North Minneapolis is also one of the city's two "green zones," an initiative to prioritize environmental funding for the city's poorest and most polluted neighborhoods.
Focusing on the North Side Now, the Minneapolis Foundation's Climate Action and Racial Equity Fund, which was announced by Mayor Jacob Frey in April, aims to reduce greenhouse gases and address racial inequities. In addition to McKnight's donation, $22,000 was donated by the Xcel Energy Foundation, Minneapolis clothing store Askov Finlayson and other contributors.
A total of 17 applicants vied for this first round of grants. A second group of grantees will be named in November.
"What's exciting [about this grant] is it's going directly to these communities to do the work," said Julia Frost Nerbonne, who heads Minnesota Interfaith Power & Light.
Her nonprofit will use a $17,500 grant to start a youth-led "environmental justice project" in September. Children and teens from several congregations will be paid to conduct energy audits, shadow energy assessors and develop a work plan to increase energy efficiency at Shiloh Temple International Ministries and a mosque, Masjid An-Nur, in north Minneapolis.
Last year, the church and mosque teamed up to build the North Side's first solar garden, powering the temple, mosque and 26 nearby homes.
"These faith communities have been central to building the moral movements ... a lot of these pastors are thought leaders," Nerbonne said. "Others will follow."
MN Renewable Now will use its $25,000 for outreach in north Minneapolis to promote clean energy, such as switching to renewable electricity or upgrading heating systems.
The $25,000 to Hourcar will also support community outreach in Minneapolis that will begin in September.
The St. Paul nonprofit is partnering with Xcel Energy and the cities of Minneapolis and St. Paul for a new electric car-sharing program. It will create 70 hubs with 150 electric cars in the Twin Cities, half of which will be in low-income areas, including north Minneapolis.
"We really want to see this service accessible for everyone, but especially for people who can't afford a car," Hourcar CEO Paul Schroeder said of the program, which he hopes will launch in 2020. "There's a recognition [those] communities don't benefit from available transportation solutions."
The Minneapolis Foundation is one of the world's oldest community foundations - a philanthropy that's mostly supported by the public rather than by a family, individual or corporation. The fund will also introduce a new way people can donate, via text messages (text climatempls to 243725 to donate). That could make donating easier and broaden the foundation's base of 1,800 donors, Rybak said.
A reminder to take action
The foundation is considering placing signs on parking ramps, the Minneapolis Convention Center and Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport with details of the texting project to target travelers and commuters who want a quick, easy way to give money toward climate change efforts, offsetting the greenhouse gases emitted from driving and flying.
"This fund is about money," Rybak said, "but it's also about reminding people to take action in every part of their lives."
Kelly Smith · 612-673-4141

Load-Date: August 1, 2019


End of Documen
t



Xcel CEO: Climate change is bipartisan
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
June 15, 2019 Saturday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D
Length: 452 words
Byline: MIKE HUGHLETT; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: U conference keynote likened global warming to the ozone depletion problem of the 1970s.


Body


Climate change has become a partisan political issue, and the transportation sector - particularly motor vehicles - is the next big greenhouse gas source that needs a major makeover.
That was the message Friday from two keynote speakers at a clean-energy conference organized by the University of Minnesota's Institute on the Environment.
"It's unfortunate the issue of climate change is becoming a partisan issue," Xcel CEO Ben Fowke told a full house at the U's McNamara Alumni Center. "It should be bipartisan."
Fowke likened global warming to the ozone-depletion problem that surfaced in the late 1970s. The manufacture of certain chemicals - notably chlorofluorocarbons - dissipated the ozone layer of the earth's atmosphere, which blocks harmful
ultraviolet light.
Through bipartisan efforts in the United States and internationally during the 1980s, agreements were made to freeze and eventually reduce the production of chlorofluorocarbons. Fowke said those efforts were like an "insurance policy."
"Today, we can take out that insurance policy" on climate change, Fowke said. And it can be done cost-effectively, he added.
While Minneapolis-based Xcel still generates 42% of its electricity in the Upper Midwest from fossil fuels - primarily coal - it is among the most aggressive U.S. utilities in targeting coal plants for early closure. Burning coal is the greatest source of greenhouse gases in the utility industry.
Xcel, which is also the nation's leading wind-power utility, has a goal of generating 100% carbon-free energy by 2050. The company is counting on the development of new cost-effective technologies to meet that target, which could otherwise be quite expensive.
The U.S. utility industry has had the most success of any major industrial sector in decreasing carbon emissions, though it still has a long way to go.
"We have clearly made progress in the state's power sector over the last decade," Kate Wolford, president of the Minneapolis-based McKnight Foundation, said at Friday's conference. Climate change and clean energy are one focus area of the foundation.
But carbon-emissions reduction in the transportation sector - both in Minnesota and nationwide - has been considerably less than the reductions seen in power generation.
In Minnesota's electricity sector, greenhouse-gas emissions fell 29% from 2005 to 2016, according to a report earlier this year from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and the Minnesota Department of Commerce. During the same time, transportation emissions fell only 8%.
Transportation has overtaken electricity production as Minnesota's leading source of greenhouse gas emissions. "This is where we need to double down," Wolford said.
Mike Hughlett · 612-673-7003

Load-Date: June 17, 2019


End of Documen
t



Sandy sounds alarm on climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
November 4, 2012 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2012 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2OP
Length: 715 words
Highlight: Storm should mark the end of America's risky complacency.


Body


Call it a hurricane, a superstorm, Frankenstorm or just plain Sandy. We'll call the epic meteorological sock to the nation's populous central Atlantic seaboard last week an agenda-changer. Climate change is suddenly more difficult for Americans to deny or ignore.
The nation has seen plenty of other signs that the climate is changing in ways consistent with scientific projections of a rapidly warming planet. This year alone has produced the warmest U.S. summer on record, the nation's second-largest wildfire by area, the biggest drought since the 1930s, the smallest expanse of Arctic Sea ice ever recorded, and ferocious megathunderstorms in places ranging from Duluth to Washington, D.C.
Still, climate change was held in such low regard among Americans that GOP presidential candidate Mitt Romney made President Obama's attention to the planet a laugh line at the Republican National Convention. The issue barely surfaced in presidential debates last month, and a Washington Post-Stanford University poll in June found climate change receding among Americans' concerns.
That changed with a whopper of a storm that took particular aim at the nation's largest and most iconic city. As was true when a different sort of tragedy occurred 11 years ago, when New York is stricken, the whole nation feels the pain.
In the days since Sandy made landfall, climate change conversations have popped up everywhere. Was this storm caused by global warming? Not directly, scientists say. But an Atlantic Ocean 9 degrees Fahrenheit warmer than normal this fall and New York area sea levels already a foot higher than a century ago are conditions that favor bigger, more frequent and more northerly hurricanes.
Is human activity causing this change? That's been the touchier question for politicians in the face of concerted efforts to discredit the conclusion that human-generated carbon emissions are a culprit. But the question is nearly settled in the scientific community. An overwhelming consensus points to human-generated greenhouse gases as a major driver of global warming. Those who would base this nation's policies on the credibility of the tiny minority of dissenters are taking a perilous risk -- as Sandy's U.S. death toll, nearing 100 at this writing, and its estimated $50 billion cost attest.
An election comes hard on Sandy's heels. As Romney himself acknowledged with his backhanded swipe at his party's convention, Obama has tried to advance policies that respond to climate change. Romney's 2011 suggestion that some portion of the Federal Emergency Management Agency ought to devolve to cash-strapped states seems almost silly today.
Tuesday's winner will be compelled to look anew at the nation's response to climate change. The policy considerations must have two aims: Carbon emissions into the atmosphere should be reduced, and defenses against weather extremes should be bolstered.
Energy policy will figure large in these conversations. A reexamination of nuclear power is in order to determine whether 21st-century technology can make it a safer and more sustainable option. So is a push for more renewable generation of electricity. A tax on carbon emissions ought not be dismissed out of hand.
In addition, government can encourage faster development and deployment of energy-saving technologies in transportation, heating, lighting and manufacturing. Inviting energy-saving lifestyle changes makes sense, too.
At the same time, America must get serious about upgrading its infrastructure to withstand harsher weather and higher sea levels. One intriguing idea is the creation of a public-private infrastructure bank, funded in part by an earmarked federal income tax surcharge and dispensed according to need-based criteria to shore up vulnerable places and critical services.
Before Sandy, such ideas may have been deemed radical. In the storm's wake, they're looking increasingly prudent.
CALL TO ACTION
"Our climate is changing. And while the increase in extreme weather we have experienced in New York City and around the world may or may not be the result of it, the risk that it might be -- given this week's devastation -- should compel all elected leaders to take immediate action."
New York Mayor MICHAEL BLOOMBERG, in a statement endorsing President Obama for re-election.

Load-Date: November 5, 2012


End of Documen
t



Ecolab commits to U.N. climate change targets
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
December 6, 2019 Friday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D
Length: 532 words
Byline: DEE DePASS; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: It will buy wind electricity, end its carbon emissions.


Body


To fight global warming, filtration and cleaning chemicals firm Ecolab Inc. will cut its carbon emissions by 50% by 2030 and to zero by 2050, company officials announced Thursday.
The effort, which will involve supply chain and plant operational changes, embraces the United Nations' goal for businesses to help reduce global temperature escalations to below 2 degrees Celsius.
Ecolab - which is based in St. Paul and provides cleaning chemicals and services to restaurants, hotels, breweries and factories - is the latest company to align its environmental goals with the U.N. Global Compact's new "Business Ambition" challenge.
To meet its commitment, the $15 billion Ecolab said it plans to convert to 100% renewable energy sources at all of its factories. That move started in 2018 when Ecolab signed a green-power purchase agreement and committed to financing a wind farm that will provide 100% of its electricity needs in North America.
That wind farm will come online sometime next year. In Europe, Ecolab already buys 99.4% of its electricity from renewable sources, said Doug Baker, the company's chief executive.
To date, more than 28 companies have accepted the challenge, including British Telecommunications, Hewlett Packard Enterprise and Levi Strauss & Co.
Earlier this week, Minnetonka-based Cargill committed to slashing its greenhouse gas emissions across its entire supply chain by 30% per ton of product in the next decade. Maplewood-based 3M previously committed to sourcing 50% of its electricity needs in 70 countries from
renewable sources by 2025. It also committed to eventually moving to 100% green energy sourcing.
In St. Paul, Ecolab officials said they are happy to join the U.N's latest effort to curb energy use and greenhouse gases.
"Climate change demands urgent action, and it's absolutely critical that we accelerate our efforts to mitigate its impact," Baker said in a statement. "We don't yet have all the answers as to how we'll get to net-zero carbon emissions, but business needs to come together and create forward momentum. That's why Ecolab is committing to [limiting the temperature rise to] 1.5 degrees Celsius," or 2.7 degrees Fahrenheit above preindustrial levels.
Besides its renewable energy goal, Ecolab said it plans to electrify its entire fleet of service vehicles and expand the number of energy-efficiency projects at its plants, offices, research centers and other facilities around the world.
The company also will work with supply-chain partners and customers to adopt similar climate-change reduction goals.
Ecolab already works with food and industrial customers to reduce their energy costs and water use, said Emilio Tenuta, Ecolab vice president of corporate sustainability.
In 2018, Ecolab helped customers conserve 188 billion gallons of water. The water savings helped avoid 19 trillion BTUs of energy use and 1.1 million tons of greenhouse gas emissions, Tenuta said, noting that water is often "the missing link in the climate debate. If the world economy made gains in sustainable water management, we'd be a significant step closer to a more climate-resilient world and cut our carbon emissions in the process."
Dee DePass · 612-673-7725

Load-Date: December 6, 2019


End of Documen
t



State firms step up on climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
May 11, 2019 Saturday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 364 words
Highlight: Legislature needs to follow the lead of big businesses that are recognizing the risks and taking action.


Body


Curbing climate change is fast becoming a front-and-center issue for voters - but also for leaders of big businesses, who are starting to see both the upside to reforms and the considerable risk of delay.
In a recent letter to Gov. Tim Walz and House and Senate leaders in both parties, some of Minnesota's largest companies made clear that "climate change poses a material risk to our businesses, threatens the competitiveness and livelihoods of our supply chain and impacts the communities in which we operate." The signers included General Mills, Cargill, Target, Best Buy, Aveda and Tennant Co., along with companies from outside Minnesota.
While not specifically endorsing Walz's climate plan, which would move Minnesota to carbon-free electricity by 2050, a number of the companies are working toward similar goals.
General Mills reports in the letter that it recently achieved 100% renewable power for its U.S. operations and is working toward a 2050 goal for sustainable emissions. Best Buy has committed to carbon-neutrality by 2050. Cargill plans to reduce its absolute greenhouse gas emissions by at least 10% by 2025, while Target is aiming for a 30% reduction by 2030. Tennant Co. notes that reducing greenhouse-gas emissions will make the company more competitive, rather than less, "while creating benefits for many of our stakeholders."
Walz's plan passed the House but hit a roadblock in the Senate. Combating climate change should not be a matter of political orthodoxy. It is a fight to preserve habitable conditions for the planet on which we all live. The science is settled, and the evidence that change is already upon us grows by the day.
Businesses look at the bottom line. As noted in the letter, a growing number have decided that taking action will "ensure prolonged profitability, reduce risk, safeguard the resilience of our supply chains and allow us to better meet the growing demands of our customers and investors."
Minnesotans should be pleased that these companies and others have stepped forward. Strong, forward-looking civic engagement is what historically has pushed this state forward in so many areas.
Legislators now must find the will to do the same.

Load-Date: May 13, 2019


End of Documen
t



A key turning point on climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
June 30, 2013 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2013 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2OP
Length: 801 words
Highlight: Critics of President Obama's plan need to offer up solutions.


Body


The crowds attending President Obama's historic and pragmatic call to action on climate change on Tuesday were likely still filing out of the speech when the Republican response to the clear challenge issued by the president - if you don't like my plan, come up with something better - landed in e-mail inboxes around the country.
It wasn't hard to guess the contents of the Republican National Committee missive. Lots of tired, talk-radio rhetoric about "job killing regulations" and the "liberal agenda." But no alternative solutions or vision were offered for combating climate change, even though there's substantial support among conservatives (and many liberals) for a more comprehensive, efficient and market-based strategy that includes taxing carbon emissions but reducing other taxes and, potentially, other regulations.
The self-serving comments made after the speech by Democratic Rep. Joe Manchin from West Virginia were just as predictable. Manchin charged that Obama was launching a "war on coal" but offered no viable alternative to the harmful smokestack status quo reliant on his home state's mining industry.
Obama's speech made it clear that the nation is moving forward with serious, substantive measures to fight climate change. The speech should have marked a turning point for Republicans and stuck-in-place Democrats such as Manchin, too.
Rather than simply opposing action, it's time for them to propose solutions - or they will cede the historic opportunity at hand to help shape the necessary sweeping changes to slow climate change before the Earth's temperatures rise to dangerous levels. Catastrophic consequences potentially include more flooding of major coastal cities, damage to marine ecosystems that are a global food source, crop disruption, violent weather, loss of wildlife diversity and increased disease risks as, for example, mosquitoes that carry malaria expand their habitat.
The obstructionism-above-all approach didn't serve the nation well with the Affordable Care Act, which would have benefited from more bipartisan, business-friendly touches. The same mistake must not be repeated with climate change.
Obama's speech specifically invited this bipartisan engagement. His measured actions - the most significant of which are power plant emission standards - are one big piece of the puzzle needed to reduce carbon. Power plants are the leading sources of greenhouse gases in the United States. Obama's regulatory initiatives to limit emissions are a worthwhile first step.
Obama's course of action also builds upon the farsighted work done already in Minnesota, which put in place renewable energy standards in 2007 and augmented them this year with a new state solar energy standard.
Reaction both positive and negative to Obama's initiative hopefully will spur Congress to act, if only to try to do better than the president's regulatory-heavy approach. Bipartisan cooperation is still a long shot. But it's critical in designing reforms to address other carbon pollution and to create the right economic incentives to transition the United States from fossil fuels to next-generation energy sources.
Thoughtful conservatives, such as former South Carolina Republican Rep. Bob Inglis, who heads a George Mason University energy policy think tank, have good ideas - especially the carbon tax - that merit serious consideration as future policy is crafted. Republicans' traditional big-business constituency also has a huge stake in making sure their interests are represented at the table. Special-interest input will be beneficial as well in ensuring that the economy weathers the transition to cleaner energy.
The debate over climate change would also benefit from fresh perspectives. Advocates of climate action have legions of committed supporters but too often are preaching to the choir. More people must be convinced of the need to act. Inglis, who lost his seat in a 2010 primary fight after he became an advocate for a climate change response, should be enlisted in the cause.
In his soft Carolina drawl, Inglis makes a compelling case for conservative leadership on the issue, effortlessly explaining climate science while smoothly dropping "government-shrinking carbon tax" into the conversation and preaching a prosperity gospel of sorts about a future in which energy innovation leads to abundance in the developed and developing world.
"We have enough people on the left of the spectrum concerned and ready to act,'' Inglis said. But to enact a more substantive national policy, "It's essential we find people on the right.''
A video featuring former South Carolina Republican Rep. Bob Inglis and former Reagan economics adviser Art Laffer offers a quick, accessible overview of the case for a carbon tax. To watch it, go to http://energyandenterprise.com/

Load-Date: July 3, 2013


End of Documen
t



More deer ticks, fewer loons: Climate change on the Great Lakes
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 14, 2011 Thursday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2011 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 801 words
Byline: JOSEPHINE MARCOTTY; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Two environmental groups warn of more damage by midcentury.


Body


Isle Royale in Lake Superior used to be too cold for deer ticks. But not anymore.
The ticks, which carry Lyme disease, have been found for the first time on the island off the coast of northern Minnesota. And by the end of the century, nesting loons may disappear altogether from most of the Great Lakes.
Those are some of the findings of a report on the effects of climate change on the Great Lakes' five largest national parks, made public Wednesday by two environmental groups, the Natural Resources Defense Council and the Rocky Mountain Climate Organization.
It was the latest in a series of studies they have conducted on the current and future effects of a warming global climate on national parks from California to Virginia.
The report, the authors said, provides an early look at what's to come if the Republican-led Congress continues to thwart federal efforts to curb greenhouse gas emissions. Republicans this week tried and failed to repeal new standards for more energy efficient lightbulbs, and are resisting the new federal rules regulating greenhouse gas emissions expected later this summer. They say the rules are unnecessary intrusions on freedom, and job-killers.
"We have an increasing partisan divide on this," said Stephen Saunders, president of the Rocky Mountain Climate Organization and a former national parks official with the Department of the Interior. "If people pay attention to how the places they know and love respond to climate change, I hope that makes people aware of what we should be doing differently."
The authors analyzed a century's worth of temperature trends for the Great Lakes area drawn from two weather stations on Lake Michigan, and found that both show more rapid change than the global averages. The one near the Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore, near Chicago showed that in the last decade average temperatures have increased by 1.6 degrees, and the one near Picture Rocks National Lakeshore in Michigan showed an average increase of 2.7 degrees.
Lee Frelich, a University of Minnesota researcher who studies the effects of climate change in the Upper Midwest, said the analysis used widely accepted climate models and data, and the findings are right on the mark.
"Climate changes are more extreme in the mid continents," said Frelich, who was not involved in the report. "If you are fairly far north you will see bigger magnitudes of climate change than other places."
Water temperatures in Lake Superior have increased 4.5 degrees between 1979 and 2006, twice the rate of land temperatures, the report found. Between the 1970s and 2009, winter ice cover over the lakes shrunk 15 percent.
The report also documented a 31 percent increase in rain falling during big storms, and a 12 percent increase in wind speeds. Combined with less ice during the winter, those changes lead to faster erosion along the shores, putting fragile landscapes like the Sleeping Bear Sand Dunes in Michigan at risk. Frelich said that he's already seen the effect on his family's cabin in Door County, Wis., where winter storms have taken out trees on the edge of his property.
The report found that temperature changes are having a sometimes dramatic effect on wildlife. A growing number of botulism outbreaks, linked to higher water temperatures, have killed hundreds to thousands of birds in recent years in the Sleeping Bear Sand Dunes. Meanwhile, Isle Royale used to be free of deer ticks, which can only survive in average winter temperatures of 19 degrees or higher. But a park service employee this year reported finding a deer tick on his body after he'd been there for a month, meaning he had picked it up while on the island.
The report projects that average temperatures at Isle Royale and the Apostle Islands would increase by an average of 3.6 and 4.6 degrees by 2040 to 2069, depending on the rate of future air emissions -- warm enough to squeeze nesting loons into the northwest corner of Lake Superior.
Mark Seeley, Minnesota state climatologist, said it's difficult to make projections about Lake Superior using data from two weather stations in Lake Michigan. But he said the report accurately documented the extreme upward shift in minimum temperatures in the winter. "The winter season is showing more dramatic increase in temperatures than summer," he said.
The authors said that the five parks in the study draw 3.7 million visitors per year, generate $200 million in spending and support close to 3,000 jobs. "We face the financial reality that climate change may bring tremendous economic challenge," said Larry McDonald, the mayor of Bayfield, Wis., a tourist town on the edge of the Apostle Islands. He joined the authors of the report in a telephone news conference. "We need to respect and protect Lake Superior," he said.
Josephine Marcotty - 612-673-7394

Load-Date: July 14, 2011


End of Documen
t



WARM FRONT: Confronting a changing climate
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
June 16, 2019 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1477 words
Byline: JENNIFER BJORHUS; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: INVASIVES CHOKE BIRDS' HIGHWAY // Fluctuating levels on Mississippi, ushered in by a warming climate, doom key flood plain


Body


Second in a series
HOUSTON COUNTY, MINN. - Andy Beebe and his crew move deliberately through the slough, their boots squelching in wet black silt left by the latest flood.
They push metal planters into the mud, pull bare-root seedlings from bags at their waists, and bend to tuck them into the mucky soil. Then they poke in a red flag to mark the twigs.
Straighten up. Repeat.
Soon, dozens of biodegradable red flags dance in the wind like a field of poppies.
There will be 1,000 flags by sundown - another day in an ambitious effort to restore a critical flood plain forest along the Mississippi River that has been morphing into a barren grassland with an assist from Minnesota's volatile new rainfall patterns.
For decades, the cottonwood, silver maple and white swamp oak that long reigned along the Mississippi have been struggling to regenerate, stifled by disease, rising waters that drown the seedlings and other forces. As the mature trees die out, so does critical forest habitat in one of the country's largest, most critical migration highways for North American birds.
Hundreds of bird species are affected, Beebe says. "They've been hit pretty hard."
When the forest canopy gaps and shrinks, an aggressive, sun-loving invasive plant called reed canary grass takes hold, a species that thrives in areas disturbed by fluctuating water.
If the flooding doesn't kill the young trees, the grass will. The emerald-green grass, with its broad leaves and large seed heads, can grow 6 feet tall and higher. Its dense root mass forms a thick mat that chokes out the tree seedlings - as well as native sedges, grasses and other plants that insects, pollinators, birds and a range of animals rely on.
Particularly threatened are forest-dependent songbirds such as the cerulean warbler and prothonotary warbler, as well as the red-shouldered hawk and wood duck.
Instead of a rich, diverse flood plain forest, what's emerging is a super-tough grassland, a monoculture that does not support much wildlife. The conversion is long and complex. But Beebe, a 31-year-old forest ecologist with Audubon Minnesota, says he thinks it's aggravated by the more severe rainstorms Minnesota is receiving earlier and later in the year as its climate shifts.
The Mississippi's shrinking flood plain forests are one window into the complex ways that Minnesota's familiar landscapes are changing with the arrival of a warmer, wetter future that climate change ushers in. Oak forests are moving north, lakes are thawing sooner and a monoculture like reed canary grass is finding even more hospitable places to flourish.
"It's more or less a desert," Beebe said of new grasslands. "A green desert."
Mussels and crawfish holes
Beebe has been working on the flood plain restoration since 2014, with funding from the state's Lessard-Sams Outdoor Heritage Council and a focus on strategic sections of the Upper Mississippi River National Wildlife and Fish Refuge south of Wabasha.
It's slow work.
First, crews spend two to three years killing and suppressing the reed grass - mowing it and spraying with glyphosate, a powerful but controversial weed killer that Beebe considers a necessary evil.
When the grass is beaten back, they plant flood plain trees, such as swamp white oak, basswood, cottonwood, silver maple and bitternut hickory, then spray the seedlings with blood meal to deter deer and other browsers.
On a recent spring morning they were working the Root River Tract south of Winona. The slough had been flooded for nearly two months this spring, Beebe said, and they had to wait for the water to recede.
The flood's effects were still evident: large, freshwater mussels lay scattered in the mud, probably cracked open by river otters. Mounds of crawfish holes jutted from the silt like miniature mud volcanoes in a school science project.
In a few weeks it will be 95 degrees and buggy, said Beebe, moving a few feet over to plant the next tree. A cool May day for planting was welcome. Soon they would have 3,000 seedlings in the ground - a good feeling.
The invasion of reed canary grass is a good example of why, in an environment where many factors are changing simultaneously, it's so difficult to pinpoint the impact of climate change.
Tim Yager, deputy refuge manager at the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, which manages the Upper Mississippi refuge, points to the Mississippi's chain of locks and dams as the bigger problem. They artificially pool the water, preventing the soil from periodically drying out so that tree seedlings can root, he said.
Increased use of nitrogen fertilizer across the Midwest is another prime culprit, according to Susan Galatowitsch, head of the University of Minnesota's Department of Fisheries, Wildlife and Conservation Biology. Galatowitsch thinks climate change certainly plays a role by aggravating floods, but the bigger driver, she said, is how the grass seizes on extra nitrogen and gets aggressive.
"I think there's a long way to go before we know how [climate change] fits into those other factors and stressors" causing the spread of canary grass, she said. "It's just one more stressor."
But Dan Shaw, a senior ecologist at the Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources, said he sees a clear link to climate change.
"We have pretty clear information that reed canary grass thrives where there are water fluctuations, and that many of our native plants can't handle those conditions very well," Shaw said. "It's also been well documented that we've been having some extreme precipitation. I think that combination shows a link why reed canary grass is thriving in many of these ecosystems."
'Major threat'
The grass itself is a subject of hot debate. Its native North American strain is devilishly difficult to distinguish from the one introduced from Europe long ago for livestock forage. In fact, they share the same Latin name: Phalaris arundinacea.
It's a "circumboreal" plant, Galatowitsch said, a species that occurs simultaneously at high latitudes in various parts of the world. Americans have bred and developed new cultivars, and Minnesota is one of the largest producers of the seed for wet forage grass.
"I've got people calling me from all across the country and they absolutely love it for their horses, their cattle, everything," said Mitch Magnusson at Magnusson Kveen Farms, a seed distributor in Roseau specializing in reed canary grass.
The DNR calls Phalaris arundinacea "a major threat to natural wetlands."
New research suggests that grass along the Mississippi River may actually be the Minnesota strain and not an exotic plant, according to Neil Anderson, a professor in the U's Department of Horticultural Science, who studies the genetics of the grass.
A native can also be invasive, Anderson said: "They don't have to be foreign and exotic to be invasive. Think of poison ivy."
Either way, the grass has infested wetlands across Minnesota, including lake shorelines, streams and rivers. It's the predominant grass in Minnesota road ditches and a major hurdle in restoring high-quality vegetation in wetlands, Shaw said.
"Nearly every project we work on has reed canary grass on it," he said. "The big question for us is, how do we maintain landscapes that provide a wide range of environmental benefits and functions?"
That's what Beebe and his crew sweat over.
"We're really trying to strategically work on big, large stretches of forest," he said, jabbing bare-root seedlings that resemble pale, gnarled carrots into the soil.
Beebe estimates that roughly half the seedlings will survive for the long term. The flooding and ice this past winter, for example, buried some of the 2014 plantings, he said.
But he'd be happy with that: It could be enough to prevent the canopy from disappearing, so birds can continue to call this part of the Mississippi flood plain home.
The goal: keep forests forests.
"You've got to keep on it," Beebe said. "Every time we plant trees, it's kind of like rolling the dice."
Jennifer Bjorhus · 612-673-4683
About this series: "Warm Front" is a Star Tribune occasional series examining the ways that climate change is altering Minnesota and the lives of its residents. Read more at startribune.com.
REED CANARY GRASS: WETLANDS SCOURGE
An aggressive, sun-loving invasive called reed canary grass thrives in areas disturbed by water fluctuation. It's been infesting wetlands across Minnesota, including critical flood plain forests along the Mississippi River, where it chokes out trees and other plants.
Average gage height of the Mississippi River at Winona
(Growing season, April 1 to Sept. 30)
During the last 20 years (1999-2018) river stage has increased 4.2 inches.
1999: 6.7 ft.
2000: 5.9 ft.
2014: 9.4 ft.
2018: 8.3 ft.
(See the page PDF or microfilm for the complete chart.)
Sources: EDDMapS. 2019 (Early Detection & Distribution Mapping System), U.S. Geological Survey; Upper Midwest Water-Science Center

Load-Date: June 18, 2019


End of Documen
t



Trump's no 'prophet' on climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
January 22, 2020 Wednesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2020 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 517 words
Highlight: The president should hear, and heed, the call of world leaders gathered in Davos.


Body


President Donald Trump rightly touted "America's extraordinary prosperity" in his speech at the World Economic Forum (WEF) in Davos, Switzerland, on Tuesday. But his history of overlooking the global component of that success is wrongheaded, especially because transnational threats can reverse the uninterrupted U.S. economic growth that began during the Obama era.
Chief among these threats is climate change, which the president has previously called a hoax. He didn't go that far in Davos, but he did decry the "perennial prophets of doom and their predictions of the apocalypse."
No, conditions aren't apocalyptic. (Unless you're a kangaroo in Australia's wildfires - or if not Down Under, down south in coastal U.S. states that are requesting billions in aid to mitigate the impact of climate change while never mentioning the term, according to a New York Times analysis of the requests).
A more adult reckoning came from 17-year-old climate activist Greta Thunberg, who told the gathered elites in Davos that "the facts are clear, but they're still too uncomfortable for you to address." That alacrity was amplified by a more august source, 81-year-old WEF founder Klaus Schwab, who said that "the world is in a state of emergency and the window to act is closing fast."
States of emergency are possible because of other transnational threats, too. Responding to them multilaterally is much more effective, especially in cases like pandemics (possibly including the coronavirus China is straining to contain), as well as the borderless scourge of terrorism. Trump will meet with Pakistani, Iraqi and Kurdish leaders in Davos, but his "America First" foreign policy that's led to the abrogation of climate, nuclear and trade accords undermines U.S. security.
This includes the economic security that undergirds everything else. It's welcome news that the administration reached a "phase one" trade deal with China, and that in the midst of Washington's gridlock an accord between the U.S., Mexico and Canada was passed on a bipartisan basis.
The progress on trade - as well as fiscal stimulus from 49 central banks - was among factors cited Monday by the International Monetary Fund as it predicted global growth of 3.3% in 2020, up from last year's 2.9%. But IMF Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva also noted ominous echoes of a previous era. "The beginning of this decade [has been] eerily reminiscent of the 1920s - high inequality, rapid spread of technology and huge risks and rewards in finance," Georgieva said. "For the analogy to stop right there and go no further, acting together in a coordinated way is absolutely critical."
Trump's triumphal tone at the Alpine resort came amid a mountain of evidence that he engaged in the wrong kind of internationalism - leveraging Ukraine's government to interfere in the U.S. election. The impeachment trial that began Tuesday is not a "hoax," as the president again mischaracterized it in Davos. For Congress, it's a constitutional duty.
Indeed, good governance and the rule of law are the roots of the economic strength Trump talked about in Davos.

Load-Date: January 22, 2020


End of Documen
t



CLIMATE CHANGE
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
March 1, 2020 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2020 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: SCIENCE+HEALTH; Pg. 1SH
Length: 949 words
Byline: GREG STANLEY; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: A CRISIS DEEPLY ROOTED // Complexity of restoring our prairies entangles climate change fight


Body


It's been more than 91 years since the last crop was pulled from the soil of an old farm field that, hidden away in a science reserve just north of the Twin Cities, has been left to grow wild.
But the soil still hasn't recovered.
Now that field is being studied by researchers from the University of Minnesota who are trying to understand the remarkable underground biology that once made North America's grasslands one of the world's richest ecosystems. And, in the process, understand what it would take to restore that lost ecology.
What they've found so far is that former farmland is only half as productive - growing native grasses and wildflowers in half the abundance, numbers and total weight - as corners of the property that were never plowed. Many native plant species have never returned and likely never will.
The researchers found that even now, nearly a century after the field went fallow, the soil's complex web of microbes, fungi, bacteria, nutrients and carbon, which are fundamental to plant life, are still so depleted from the field's relatively brief time as a farm that it would take another
700 years to fully recover.
"The system doesn't just bounce back," said Forest Isbell, the study's co-author and assistant professor at the U.
The study, published in a recent issue of the journal Nature Ecology & Evolution, highlights the immense challenge that conservation advocates in Minnesota and much of the Midwest face as they try to retire farmland and restore prairies.
Farmland retirement programs are at the heart of the bulk of Minnesota's efforts to capture carbon to combat climate change and to restore habitat to stem the collapse of bee, pollinator and other wildlife populations. But it turns out that the fertility and richness of that soil took centuries to build through hundreds of species of plants living, dying and decomposing. Once the fertility is gone, there is no quick way to bring it back.
Conservationists are only beginning to understand the importance of soil health and plant diversity in recovery programs.
For years, starting in the 1980s, the thought behind hugely popular government conservation efforts, such as the Conservation Reserve Program, was to just get grass in the ground - period, said Greg Hoch, prairie wildlife team leader for the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. In the haste to restore grasslands, it wasn't uncommon to plant prairie grasses that had been harvested from other parts of the Midwest.
"People were so desperate to find grass they'd look anywhere, so you'd see seeds from western Nebraska get planted in central Illinois," Hoch said. "Well, there is just so much more moisture in Illinois and the grass went crazy."
State programs started requiring landowners to plant native grasses along with one or two types of wildflowers.
Still, many of the fields failed to thrive. Native plants would die out or lose in competition to exotic species that are better suited for the fertilizer that can blow in and rain down from other farms. Grasses would strangle out wildflower seeds brought in from hundreds of miles away rather than grow with them.
Only in the last decade have restoration efforts turned to what is happening below the ground, Hoch said.
That research became especially urgent, he said, because of public concern over the drastic fall of native bee and pollinator populations in the past few years.
Minnesota's honeybee and native bee populations have been cut to a fraction over the past 20 years, while monarch butterflies have fallen by at least 70% across the continent.
Up the food chain, once-common prairie birds such as redheaded woodpeckers have been nearly wiped out of Minnesota, along with hibernating bats and other species.
The main culprit over and over again is some combination of a loss of habitat, a loss of food along with increased pesticide use or an introduction of disease.
Grasslands dominated by one or two species of grass simply aren't enough for Minnesota wildlife to flourish. Pollinators alone rely on dozens, if not hundreds, of species of wildflowers that bloom at different points throughout the year, Hoch said. It takes a robust soil to support that kind of plant diversity.
It's still something of a mystery exactly what it takes to restore soil health, but the surest path to success seems to be to rely on hyperlocal plants and seeds that have stood the test of time in a particular climate, he said.
Restored farms that tend to be the most resilient are those planted with as wide a variety of seeds as possible from the nearest pockets of native prairie or grasslands.
The problem is that in places such as south central Minnesota, any pockets of natural grasslands have long since been plowed over. Hyperlocal seeds are nearly impossible to find.
The U's findings show that passively waiting for plant and animal life to return is a missed opportunity, Isbell said.
Less plant life means fewer nutrients are being captured and retained in the ground, he said. Those nutrients instead run off the land with rainfall or snowmelt and pollute water and air.
With fewer species, the grasslands become more vulnerable to extreme weather, when the remaining species are unable to bounce back from drought, flooding or pests. The lack of food is one more stress on pollinators - and all the benefits they provide to crops - and will only support fewer of them.
"All of the many, many benefits we get from nature are enhanced by diversity," Isbell said. "We have these huge areas of the Earth and in the state that are slowly recovering from agriculture and we're just not getting as many benefits as we could."
Greg Stanley · 612-673-4882
SEE MICROFILM OR PDF FOR ILLUSTRATION; MAP.

Load-Date: March 2, 2020


End of Documen
t



Is global warming too hot for weather report?; Metro meteorologists Paul Douglas and Mike Fairbourne take sides on climate change, but other forecasters say they avoid the topic. - Correction Appended
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
May 22, 2008 Thursday, Metro Edition


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2008 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 758 words
Byline: BILL MCAULIFFE, PAUL WALSH, STAFF WRITERS
Body


Mike Fairbourne and Paul Douglas worked side by side for years as meteorologists at WCCO-TV. But they couldn't have been further apart on the issue of global warming.
Douglas, who was dismissed last month in a cost-cutting move, has become a prominent speaker about the mounting evidence of human-caused climate change. Fairbourne, his predecessor and successor, once signed a petition opposing measures to combat climate change, and says he regards global warming as based on "squishy science."
Predictions of whether arctic ice caps will disappear don't typically come up during the TV forecast on whether it will rain this weekend.
"Broadcast meteorologists tend to avoid deep discussions on long-term climate changes as that is really not our field of expertise," Claire Martin, chief meteorologist with CBS News in Canada and chairwoman of the International Association of Broadcast Meteorologists, said in an e-mail.
That hasn't kept local forecasters from taking a stand on the issue of predicting the global climate. Most of them are landing on the side of the skeptics.
KSTP-TV meteorologist Dave Dahl, in his regular afternoon weather spots on KSTP Radio (AM 1500), reads the record high and low for the day, illustrating extreme temperatures that are often many decades old. "More proof of global warming,'' radio host Joe Soucheray typically responds with sarcasm. Then Dahl chimes in with an affirming comment, such as "crazy" or "you got it, Joe."
Dahl did not return phone calls for this story.
KARE 11 meteorologist Belinda Jensen said the weather experts there regard global warming as an evolving theory, likewise not their area of expertise. She and her colleagues at KARE 11 all feel that human enterprise may only be partly to blame for global warming.
A multi-part series two years ago on global warming effects in Minnesota was done by a news reporter, not a meteorologist, Jensen noted. She added that the station does not prohibit any of the weather professionals from talking about global warming, but they don't.
"When it comes to our job here as meteorologists at a news station, I don't think that's our job," Jensen said. "We try to tread lightly and be smart in what we say," she said.
KMSP-TV (Fox 9) meteorologists anchored a half-hour special on global warming's effects in Minnesota last year that, said meteorologist Ian Leonard, was one of the station's most-watched specials. But as in the KARE 11 special, they let climate researchers explain the dynamics. Leonard said Fox network policy would not let him otherwise comment on the issue.
Jensen and Douglas, as well as Leonard, pointed out that forecasters might shy from global warming because they deal with short-term weather, not long-term climate.
Douglas has often brought his Power Point presentation to community groups with polar explorer Will Steger to explain the crisis. He said he is merely explaining the research that climate scientists around the world have assembled.
Meteorologists, as interpreters of the atmosphere, "have an ethical responsibility to present the state of the science, whatever that is," Douglas said.
Fairbourne said he has not changed his mind significantly in the approximately eight years since he signed a petition stating that there is no scientific evidence that gases released by human activity will lead to catastrophic global warming, and that remediation efforts would be harmful.
Though Fairbourne has been certified by the American Meteorological Society, that petition is at odds with a more recent statement by the AMS on climate change. The AMS states that there is "adequate evidence" that earth systems are warming and that "humans have significantly contributed to this change."
Those who want to get into global warming give-and-take with experts can do so on the Accuweather.com website, (www.startribune.com/a4414) which encourages debate and maintains a climate change discussion forum.
"It's best if we have intelligent, logical debate," said Ken Reeves, director of forecasting operations. Meteorologists are invited, too. "We don't say they can't speak their minds. I think that would be stifling."
The AMS, by the way, is going to take up the subject of forecasters discussing global warming when it meets next month in Boulder, Colo.
Bill McAuliffe - 612-673-7646
Paul Walsh - 612-673-4482
Correction


One of the affiliations of Claire Martin, chairwoman of the International Association of Broadcast Meteorologists, was incorrectly reported in this article. She is chief meteorologist with CBC News.
Correction-Date: May 23, 2008


Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: May 23, 2008


End of Documen
t



Superior a climate change 'antenna'
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
December 17, 2015 Thursday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2015 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 608 words
Byline: JENNIFER BROOKS; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: It's among the more rapidly warming lakes, scientists warn in study.


Body


The world's lakes are warming up - even frigid Lake Superior - scientists warn.
Dozens of researchers pooled decades' worth of data from hundreds of lakes and concluded that the world's lakes are warming even more rapidly than the oceans or the atmosphere. The warmer waters threaten fish populations, ecosystems and fresh water supplies around the globe.
Closer to home, University of Minnesota Duluth Prof. Jay Austin says the thick sheets of ice that blanketed Lake Superior for the past two winters did nothing to change the fact that Superior, like the other Great Lakes, is growing ever warmer.
"Lake Superior is one of the more rapidly warming lakes" among the 235 lakes in the study, Austin said. A two-degree temperature shift can mean the difference between an iced-over Superior or an ice-free lake, he said. "Relatively small changes can lead to large changes in systems that define our region. Duluth would be a fundamentally different place if Lake Superior never formed ice."
The study, which was funded by NASA and the National Science Foundation, found that lakes have been warming by more than half a degree per decade. That might not sound like much, but when lakes warm up, toxic clouds of algae can bloom, fish habitats can be disrupted and invasive species currently held at bay by Superior's inhospitable cold might be able to make themselves at home.
The lake study is the first of its kind to use both satellite temperature data and long-term ground measurements. More than 60 researchers surveyed more than 200 lakes that hold more than half the planet's freshwater supply, using data that stretched back at least 25 years. Their findings were announced Wednesday at the American Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C.
"These results suggest that large changes in our lakes are not only unavoidable, but are probably already happening," the study's lead author, Catherine O'Reilly, an associate professor of geology at Illinois State University, said in a statement. O'Reilly's research found that as lakes warm, their productivity declines.
A 'climate antenna'
The world's lakes are warming faster than the oceans or the atmosphere, Austin said. Unlike air temperatures, which can fluctuate wildly from day to day or even hourly, lake temperatures are stable, making them ideal systems for measuring climate change. It takes a significant shift to change the temperature of a lake - much as it takes as much energy to heat a pot of water on the stove as it does to heat an entire room.
"Obviously, Lake Superior is going to stay cold for a very long time," Austin said. "But these lakes provide a sort of 'climate antenna' that allows us to look at these global trends."
The current rate of lake warming - an average of 0.61 degrees per decade - carries the risk of a 20 percent increase in algae blooms, which deplete oxygen in the water and can be toxic to fish.
The lakes seem to be warming faster in northern climates like Minnesota, where lakes are losing their ice cover earlier.
In 2007, Austin and his colleagues found that the average summer water temperature on Lake Superior had risen more than 4 degrees since 1979.
"We have documented, since 1970, a significant reduction in the ice on Lake Superior," despite the past two winters, when the ice was so thick that tourists could trek across the lake to gawk at the Apostle Islands ice caves along the Wisconsin shore. "It sounds a little bit hollow, after the last two winters when we had quite a bit of ice. ... I'm not suggesting that we won't see ice on Lake Superior again, but we are going to see more years like 2012 when we had no ice."
Jennifer Brooks · 612-673-4008

Load-Date: December 17, 2015


End of Documen
t



Legislators and scientists team up on climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
January 16, 2013 Wednesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2013 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 827 words
Byline: JOSEPHINE MARCOTTY; BILL McAULIFFE; STAFF WRITERS, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Five researchers described the environmental challenges ahead.


Body


Science made a comeback at the State Capitol on Tuesday.
Five of Minnesota's most prominent researchers on agriculture, land use, weather and climate change gave a room packed with legislators a quick but sweeping summary of the global environmental problems facing the state. They touched on floods, drought, massive thunderstorms, a changing forest, invasive bugs and rising demand for groundwater.
The point, Reps. Jean Wagenius and Alice Hausman said, is that the DFL-controlled House intends to base new laws and policy decisions -- especially those related to climate change -- on research rather than dogma.
"It's science vs. ideology," said Hausman, a DFLer from St. Paul and chairwoman of the House Capital Investment Committee, describing a debate that is going on nationally as well. "There are still some that question the science."
It was the first of five joint committee hearings on looming environmental issues scheduled between now and the end of January. The others will focus more narrowly on groundwater, changes in infrastructure to handle extreme weather events and air pollution.
Wagenius, chairwoman of the House Environment Committee, said Tuesday's hearing was designed to give legislators the big perspective "at a graduate level" on the connections between climate change and the way Minnesotans use their natural resources through agriculture, water demand and forestry.
But some in the room questioned the premise.
"There is science and experts, and then there is political debate," said Rep. Joe McDonald, R-Delano. "And one side questions the authenticity of global warming. How do you know, if we are looking at only 200 years?"
New highs and new lows
The hearing came on the same day that the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced 2012 was the 10th-warmest year globally since 1880 and the 36th in a row with an annual temperature above the 20th-century average. This century's 12 years all rank among the 14 warmest on record. Last year was the warmest on record across the United States and third-warmest for Minnesota.
Mark Seeley, University of Minnesota climatologist, used complex charts and graphs to explain that it is not the change in weather trends alone that threatens disastrous consequences -- it is the pace of change. Temperatures might rise faster than people or nature can adapt, Seeley said.
For instance, he said, the huge storms that caused damaging floods in Duluth in June resulted in the largest discharge of water recorded from the St. Louis River. Yet five months later the St. Louis River also recorded its lowest discharge.
And though the big storms dump enormous amounts of water on the land, they are so intense that much of the water runs off before it can soak into the ground and into the aquifers. That, combined with drought in some parts of the state, is creating significant problems for farmers, Seeley said.
"Many of our soil moistures are at the lowest levels we have ever recorded," he said.
The changes also raise critical questions about water use in Minnesota -- a "headwater state" that gets all its water from the sky in the form of rain and snow.
That's both good and bad, said Harvey Thorleifson, director of the Minnesota Geological Survey. "We have control over it, but we are vulnerable to drought," he said.
Looking to solutions
But there are solutions as well. Bonnie Keeler, a University of Minnesota graduate student who studies the economics of land use, said conservation efforts in the right place can pay enormous dividends in protecting water, development, recreation and health. "The benefits are greater than the costs," she said.
Nick Jordan, a U professor of agronomy and plant genetics, told the committees that agriculture can help reduce Minnesota's greenhouse-gas emissions through development of biofuels. He also described a new type of crop called pennygrass that farmers could plant after harvesting soybeans; it holds water and soil on the land, provides critical forage for bees, and could boost profits by $300 per acre.
Peter Reich, a forestry professor, said that though it's impossible to predict how or how quickly Minnesota's northern forests will change, it could be possible to move in warmer-species trees, native to places like Iowa, to establish a different but more resilient woods.
"We have to realize we've already messed with nature. And nature may not fix itself," he said.
But even those who accept the science said it doesn't solve the daunting political problem of climate change. "I don't have an answer for my colleagues who see this as a natural event," said Rep. John Benson, DFL-Minnetonka.
Nevertheless, the climate challenges must be faced, said Rep. Kim Norton, DFL-Rochester, even if only "in bites."
"Can we handle the whole of climate change? No," she said. "But we can take factual research and move on that. We'd be irresponsible if we didn't."
marcotty@startribune.com - 612-673-7394 mcaul@startribune.com - 612-673-7646

Load-Date: January 16, 2013


End of Documen
t



Pact is just a start in climate change fight
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
December 15, 2015 Tuesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2015 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 457 words
Body


Given the grave danger posed by unchecked climate change, it's understandable that concerned citizens worldwide would want to hail the historic carbon-emission deal inked in Paris last weekend. And, in fact, getting consensus from 195 nations with varying levels of economic and political development - let alone environmental consciousness - is a remarkable diplomatic accomplishment. But with climate scientists stating that the nonbinding agreement won't fully solve the problem - even if it's fully implemented - it's clear that the Paris pact is just the beginning, not the end, of global efforts to curb emissions.
The accord acknowledges that updates to the plan will be needed. There is a legal requirement that every five years each country will need to present new emission reduction targets. This is essential in order to reach the stated objective of holding the increase in the average global temperature to less than 2 degrees Celsius (about 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit). But some scientists suggest that the most devastating climate change impact could be avoided if the increase is at or below 1.5 degrees Celsius.
Achieving either of these goals will require advancements in technology and, perhaps more challenging, political will. Transitioning to lower carbon emissions will be difficult and expensive, but it won't be as costly as the economic, political and security upheavals that aggressive global warming would bring.
Developing nations are among those that could be most impacted. That's why it's important that while every country is expected to contribute to the solution, there is a suggested mechanism that may provide funding - up to $100 billion annually, per some suggestions - to help developing nations adapt more renewable sources of energy.
Of course, the top emitters are the U.S. and China, which have the world's top two economies. So it was important that these two nations announced in advance of the conference plans to reduce carbon emissions.
Each nation will have its own unique challenges, however. China is still trying to lift millions out of poverty, and a further economic slowdown from cutting emissions may retard that objective. But the need is apparent, as evidenced by last week's latest first air pollution "red alert" in Beijing, and the central government's rule by fiat will likely mean movement toward its commitment.
U.S. leadership is imperiled, too, since President Obama's incremental progress could be undone by Republicans, especially by 2016 presidential candidates who pledge to undo Obama's executive actions to lower emissions.
That would be a terrible decision in the short-term but especially in the long-term, because the hard work on combating climate change has only just begun.

Load-Date: December 15, 2015


End of Documen
t



ELECTION 2020: RACE FOR U.S. SENATE
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 11, 2020 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2020 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 1542 words
Byline: STEPHEN MONTEMAYOR; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: TINA SMITH VOTES FOR OPTIMISM // Tina Smith is still defining herself by looking on the bright side while seeking common ground


Body


Standing on the crest of a hill, U.S. Sen. Tina Smith could take in each corner of a 100-acre Northfield farm that sat desolate and polluted just four years ago. Now it sports perennials and a community-based poultry operation.
"I am by nature an optimist," Smith told a group of lawmakers and farmers touring the Main Street Project Farm on a recent Sunday morning. "So maybe I have to check myself, but my sense is that things can restore themselves with a helping hand. Am I wrong?"
Running to keep her U.S. Senate seat for the second time in as many years - the only statewide office that's up for grabs this year - Smith is banking on that optimism to carry her in a tightening race that has become a microcosm of the bitter and divisive presidential battle.
Front and center is a battle for the future of the Supreme Court, one that is likely to play out in the Senate days before the Nov. 3 election. Smith and her GOP challenger, former congressman Jason Lewis, are sharply divided on the confirmation of Judge Amy Coney Barrett, President Donald Trump's pick to replace the late Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Smith says Barrett would be a threat to the Obama-era Affordable Care Act and to women's abortion rights.
But she has not joined calls by some Democrats to increase the size of the Supreme Court - what Republicans call "packing" - for ideological balance if Joe Biden wins the election. "Any conversation beyond what is happening," she said, "is premature."
Smith's second Senate bid comes as she is still carving out an identity for herself in Washington. Lewis, running as a staunch Trump ally, has revived depictions of Smith as an anonymous face in the crowd. At a recent Minnesota rally, the president bellowed: "Nobody even knows who the hell she is!"
It is the same line of attack Smith parried in her first race, after being appointed to replace Al Franken in 2018. She held the seat later that year in a special election, defeating Republican state Sen. Karin Housley by a nine-point margin.
"She's been through one election that she won strongly," said former Vice President Walter Mondale. "They do know her, they like her and they're voting for her. It's not just a question of will they do it - they've done it."
Until her first election, Smith was best known as a party insider. She had managed Mondale's brief 2002 Senate campaign after the death of Sen. Paul Wellstone.
A former Planned Parenthood executive, she jumped into politics as an organizer, going on to manage political campaigns before serving as chief of staff for Minneapolis Mayor R.T. Rybak and Gov. Mark Dayton.
Her 2018 victory marked the first time she campaigned for office on her own. Within months of that win, attention in Minnesota turned to U.S. Sen. Amy Klobuchar's presidential bid. Though seemingly more comfortable behind the scenes than making a scene publicly, Smith still wasted little time trying to make agricultural and health issues a priority in the Senate. She successfully lobbied for a seat on the Senate Agriculture Committee alongside Klobuchar, making Minnesota one of few states with two senators on the committee.
While farm issues don't often generate national headlines, she has cultivated an image as an effective if low-profile legislator. Smith said she leaned on her experience living and working in Alaska to bond with GOP Alaska Sen. Lisa Murkowski, and she is working with the Republican Louisiana Sen. Bill Cassidy to push for improving COVID-19 testing and contact tracing across the country.
"Farmers in general learn at a very early age from their fathers, and really quite frankly from their grandfathers many times, that working together works," said Kevin Paap, president of the Minnesota Farm Bureau, whose political action committee endorsed Smith last month. "You've got to work together with your neighbors, all of your neighbors."
Both Paap and Al Netland, president of the Northeast Area Labor Council, say that what has been dismissed by political opponents as a less-than-flashy style has failed to account for Smith's ability to get things done behind the scenes. "When we wanted something to happen in the governor's office, frankly, I'd go to Tina, not to Mark [Dayton]," Netland said.
Yet much of Minnesota is still getting to know its junior senator. While a recent Star Tribune/MPR News/KARE 11 Minnesota Poll found Smith ahead of Lewis by an eight-point margin, 49% to 41%, 10% of voters remained undecided and 17% said they had no opinion on Smith's job performance.
Ahead, but in no position to take anything for granted, Smith is splitting time between spending most weekdays in Washington and blitzing different parts of the state for multiple bursts of campaign stops on weekends.
"I feel a real responsibility to connect with and understand everybody in the state, not just the people who are kind of part of my core base," Smith said in an interview.
In the Senate, Smith has won allies on both sides of the aisle: Her work with Murkowski on addressing shortfalls in maternal care in rural communities has been turned into a Smith campaign ad.
Watching from afar, Mondale says it's significant that Smith has forged a friendship with Klobuchar, adding that it is never a guarantee that any state's two senators get along, even if they're in the same party. When Klobuchar's husband, John Bessler, contracted COVID-19 earlier this year, Smith offered up her Washington apartment for her colleague.
Smith, 62, and her husband, Archie Smith, have made their home in Minnesota since the 1980s. Born in New Mexico, Smith studied political science at Stanford University, worked in Washington, D.C., for a research group and earned her MBA at Dartmouth before making the move to Minnesota to work at General Mills.
The Smiths have two adult sons and a new grandson. In Washington, Smith lives in an apartment just a few blocks from the Capitol. Archie Smith, an independent investor, stays in Minneapolis with Moose, their chocolate lab.
Her husband's investments have been a point of attack for Lewis, who questioned what "sensitive information" was involved in some stock sales she reported at the start of the pandemic in March. Smith's campaign responded that the transactions involved her husband. Smith owns no stocks.
U.S. Sen. Maggie Hassan, D-N.H., has come to know Smith sitting next to her both on the Senate floor and in Health Committee meetings. She praises her for a low-key style that often links discussions to anecdotes involving Minnesota residents. "She cares about solving the problem, not winning the argument, and that's critical," Hassan said.
But Ginsburg's death has raised the stakes in a race Democrats need to win to have any hope of reclaiming the Senate. Senate Republicans are pressing to confirm a new justice this year. Lewis has said it is important to confirm a new justice before the election to avoid any possible 4-4 rulings on a possible contested election. Smith, meanwhile, has drawn on her background with Planned Parenthood to highlight how abortion rights and the Affordable Care Act could be imperiled by a 6-3 conservative majority in the high court.
Policing and race also are playing a crucial role in a state with a close-up view of the unrest that followed the police killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis. Lewis has run as an ardent supporter of the police. While Smith said she is opposed to defunding police, she believes more needs to be done to reshape policing in America. Floyd's death, she said, sparked "a reckoning and a realizing that public safety and our criminal justice system does not work the same if you are ... a person of color."
At each campaign stop, Smith tries to instill that sense of optimism that she is wagering will overcome what she calls "fear tactics" emanating from the other side.
"I honestly believe that Minnesotans in this moment are craving leadership that is about what can we do together," Smith said. "What do we have in common?"
Stephen Montemayor · 612-673-1755
Twitter: @smontemayor
THE ISSUES
Police reform:
I oppose defunding the police. I support systemic reform of policing and the criminal justice system so that everyone has equal justice, including all people of color. Everyone should feel safe in their homes and in their communities.
Trump's COVID-19 response:
The Trump administration's failures on COVID have hurt us. I've introduced bipartisan legislation to develop a national testing strategy. I've passed legislation to provide free diagnostic testing, and I've fought for direct help for families.
Pipeline proposals:
Science, data and environmental stewardship must guide evaluation of these projects. If PolyMet permits pass court challenges, it will go forward. With Twin Metals, the Trump administration suppressed an environmental study. Why?
Climate change:
Climate change is real, it's caused by human activity, and requires bold action. We can lead on climate action and create jobs and opportunity. My clean energy standard bill would achieve net-zero emission in the electric sector by 2050.
Gun violence:
We need to pass universal background checks to keep guns out of the hands of criminals and dangerous people. We should ban assault weapons, and prohibit people convicted of stalking from having firearms.

Load-Date: October 15, 2020


End of Documen
t



WARM FRONT: Confronting a changing climate
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
April 28, 2019 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1567 words
Byline: GREG STANLEY; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: OMEN OF CHANGE WRITTEN IN ICE // As a warming climate thins ice cover, waterways and ways of life are altered


Body


First in a series
BIRCHDALE, MINN - Looking downstream on the Rainy River, it's hard at first to see how spring is changing along the northern border.
Snowbanks still lined the American shore on a recent morning here, 45 miles west of International Falls, as fishing guide Justin Wiese raced to get his boat in the water under the morning sun.
Just a few miles up, the Little Fork and the Big Fork rivers had busted open overnight, sending a winter's worth of debris into the Rainy, along with thousands of ice chunks the size of sofas, rafts and rugby balls. It was the last of the ice-out, the final phase of one of the most active fishing seasons in Minnesota.
"Ready to dodge some icebergs?" Wiese shouted to a handful of other fishermen waiting to get after walleye.
But this year, the Rainy River anglers would not be keeping their fish. This year, for the first time, the Department of Natural Resources imposed catch-and-release rules on the border river. One major reason: Ice-out is happening earlier and earlier each spring, leaving more time for open-water fishing and, the agency fears, placing increased pressure on the river's famous walleyes.
Which means that on one of the nation's finest walleye rivers, during the best time of year to catch the prized game fish, nobody was allowed to take one home.
It's a telling symptom of climate change, and just one of countless ways that rising temperatures are altering the lives of Minnesotans and the landscape of their state.
Around the world, climate change is forcing people to revamp the way they fight wildfires, prepare for typhoons, nurture their crops through drought and manage coastal flooding. In Minnesota, the same forces are changing the state's response to spring floods, the way foresters choose trees for timber and which lakefronts can have summer cabins or resorts.
Ice is just one indicator. Across Minnesota, lakes are losing up to four days of ice every 10 years, according to the state climatology office. And it's not just Minnesota: Rivers and lakes across the continent are tending to freeze later and thaw earlier.
"You think of all the ways people interact with lake ice - skating, fishing derbies, iceboats," said John Magnuson, an ecologist and limnologist at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. "And already, in some of these lakes you have about a month less to do it."
As a Northern Minnesota fishing guide, Wiese has been as busy as ever this spring. The type of people who hire guides and brave frigid sunrises are not necessarily doing it for fish that they can eat, he said. They're typically in it to see the northern edge of the country, to get back on a boat for the first time in months, to chase trophy fish that they would photograph and release even in normal times.
But he nonetheless worries what a catch-and-release season will do to the local economy. Aside from the enthusiasts, he said, there's been a clear drop-off in the number of boats on the water. At some well-known hot spots on the Rainy River, hundreds of boats would normally line up during the ice-out season, so close together that a person could walk across the river without getting wet, he said.
Those days were few and far between this year.
"It makes you wonder if people are staying away," Wiese said.
10 fewer days
Like any other climate indicator, ice-out dates on an individual river are highly erratic, often swinging by weeks from year to year. In 2018, the Rainy River stayed frozen deep into April, later than normal. In 2016, the ice melted in mid-March, one of the earliest thaws ever recorded.
Phil Talmage, the DNR's fisheries supervisor in Baudette, cautioned that ice-out dates are "highly, highly variable." But when the data is plotted out for several decades, the trend is clear, he said.
And during early thaws, he added, there is a clear uptick in fishing pressure.
The DNR went to catch-and-release because it wants to increase the number of male walleye that make it to the spawning grounds of the Rainy River. The spring season is typically designed to protect larger spawning females - anglers can normally keep walleye under 19.5 inches long. But because more walleye are being taken during ice fishing season these days, and the ice is thawing earlier, the DNR wanted to ensure it would have a healthy male population during spawning season no matter what happens with the ice, Talmage said.
Tracking open water as an omen of climate change is still a crude science. Minnesota has been monitoring when the ice melts on the Rainy River since the 1930s. Factoring in the highs and lows, the river is trending to about 10 fewer days of ice now than it had 90 years ago. And that's just in the spring.
While the state has up to 100 years of ice-out data in some lakes and rivers, it has almost no reliable data on when they freeze each year, said Peter Boulay, a DNR climatologist.
"Ice-in is much harder to track," he said. "It'll freeze and thaw and refreeze multiple times. And if it's a huge lake, like Lake Mille Lacs, it's not so simple to see when it's frozen in the middle."
But at the University of Wisconsin, the first school in the country to study the chemistry and makeup of inland lakes, scientists have been keeping that data for decades.
The university has tracked ice coverage on Wisconsin lakes since the 1850s. In those days, ice harvesters needed to know when they could venture out on a lake to cut large frozen blocks to sell during summer; parents and school superintendents waited for ice roads that would connect Lake Superior's Apostle Islands to the mainland.
The longer the data go back, the clearer the pattern becomes: Lakes have less ice now, said Magnuson, who is semiretired after decades with the school's limnology office.
Lake Mendota in Madison gets 30 days less ice coverage - a full month - than it did during the Civil War, the data show.
And the thaws have been accelerating, Magnuson said.
Six of Lake Mendota's 10 earliest ice-outs have happened since the late 1990s.
Ice coverage is not just a function of temperatures in the spring and fall. It reflects two larger factors: the area's average annual temperature and the depth of the lake. Every body of water is continually heating up through the summer. The deeper the lake, the more volume it has to collect and store that heat. The more warmth a lake stores, the longer it takes to freeze, Magnuson said.
For the first time, some of the deepest lakes in southern Wisconsin are starting to have years when they don't freeze at all. As temperatures continue to climb, that will happen to more and more lakes in Minnesota as well, Magnuson said.
The magic number seems to be about 47 degrees Fahrenheit. Once the average temperature for an entire year reaches that point, lakes that have historically frozen over every year start to see some years where they remain open.
"That doesn't mean they'll always be open, because it's still so variable," Magnuson said. "But you start to see it where you'll have ice, ice, ice, no ice."
Algae blooms
The Wisconsin researchers helped publish a study earlier this year showing that if temperatures climb 2 degrees Celsius - a goal set by the United Nations to limit the damage of climate change - more than 20,000 lakes across the Northern Hemisphere will stop freezing over every year.
And that will trigger an ecological chain reaction that scientists are just beginning to understand. Without ice cover on a lake, aquatic life will begin to change - often for the worse, said Lesley Knoll, station biologist at the University of Minnesota's Itasca Biological Station and Laboratories.
More light and more oxygen penetrate the water when a lake lacks ice cover, which leads to greater algae blooms in the summer and shrinks the livable area for certain cold-water-loving fish, such as the tullibee.
And tullibee, which are highly sensitive to oxygen levels, are often the best indicators of a lake's health. They're an important food source for most game fish in Minnesota, including walleye and northern pike. As they die off, the entire food chain is disrupted.
Recognizing these looming challenges, the DNR has begun monitoring 25 "sentinel lakes" throughout the state to better understand how rising temperatures are changing the life and chemistry within them. Ultimately, regulators hope the data will help them mitigate the smaller, incremental changes that subtly alter the character of a lake before the more obvious and detrimental effects occur, such as the loss of fish populations and the rise of invasive species.
Knoll is researching a paper on the cultural costs of losing ice, from Swedish skating competitions and indigenous religious ceremonies to canceled fishing derbies.
"Ice is a part of the culture," she said. "When it's not there - when you used to be able to ice fish by Thanksgiving, but now you can't - you feel it."
Greg Stanley · 612-673-4882
About this series: "Warm Front'' is a Star Tribune occasional series examining the ways that climate change is altering Minnesota and its landscape.
ICE-OUT ON THE RAINY RIVER
Spring ice-out on the Rainy River in Baudette has been trending earlier and earlier in recent decades, allowing anglers more days for open-water fishing and placing strains on the walleye population.
Number of days until ice-out from the start of the year
(See the page PDF or microfilm for the complete chart.)
Source: Minnesota Department of Natural Resources

Load-Date: May 2, 2019


End of Documen
t



CLIMATE CHANGE
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
January 8, 2019 Tuesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 9A
Length: 583 words
Byline: JAMES P. LENFESTEY, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Plausible magic bullets for the environment in 2019? // On the national level, a tariff on goods made without pollution protections like ours; on the state level, a well-directed gas-tax increase.


Body


As Democrats take over the Houses in both Washington and Minnesota, with Republicans controlling both Senates, what should they do about fixing climate change, for which there is a national clamor, given the resolute opposition of the Republican Party top to bottom to engage with the issue?
Here are two suggestions:
On the federal level, where President Donald Trump's hostility to positive climate action is breathtaking, there may be a magic bullet. For years, the nonpartisan Citizens' Climate Lobby has proposed a three-part strategy to address the climate crisis: a fee on the carbon pollution content of products; that fee rebated 100 percent to American families; and a border adjustment, aka a tariff, requiring similar carbon fees in other countries. The first two steps will not happen, or even be discussed, in the coal-fired Mitch McConnell-led Senate and the Russian-oil-inspired Trump White House. But the border adjustment just might sell.
First, the ugly background. The industrialized West inadvertently made a very bad deal in the free-trade era, essentially offshoring our pollution to unregulated developing countries. China is desperately trying to undo that catastrophic legacy now, and it will succeed, but the ecological wreckage is epic, just as it was in America after the rapid industrialization of World War II left coal ash and toxins falling like dark rain over America's cities. We fixed that beginning in the 1960s with increasingly effective and detailed regulations, including slowly cleaning up so-called Superfund sites that remain a legacy of that rapid Wild West industrialization.
Today, Trump "loves" tariffs. The problem is the random nature of his tariff blunderbuss. The better solution is a universal tariff at the U.S. border on products produced without pollution protections commensurate to those within the border. This would have the effect of quietly forcing other countries to clean up their environmental acts, as we did ours, if they want to sell to us. Then, when Trump and McConnell retire and the Senate passes a carbon fee and dividend, adding carbon to that tariff will reduce global carbon pollution without firing a shot.
As the world's largest market, the U.S. can control the environmental destiny of other countries while protecting our farmers and industries who have invested heavily in pollution control. Who can argue with that?
On the state level, now is the perfect time to increase the gas tax, with the current price per gallon remarkably low. Gov. Tim Walz's proposed 25-cent tax would take the current price of around $2.10 per gallon to $2.35, still a relative bargain.
The key is what to do with the money. It was notable how well-received has been the demonstration proposal in the federal farm bill to assist farmers toward practices that increase soil health. Why not spread that program around the state like fertilizer with a healthy chunk of that gas-tax money? Farmers well understand that better soils increase yields, retain moisture and lower fossil-fuel inputs. Meanwhile, the climate benefits as more carbon is stored in the soils.
Although no policy no matter how sensible will be easy with divided legislatures in Washington and St. Paul, these two steps fit the agendas of rural and urban constituencies alike. Walz clearly cares about both. No one knows what Trump cares about, but let's find out.
James P. Lenfestey is a former editorial writer for the Star Tribune focusing on energy, education and the environment.

Load-Date: January 8, 2019


End of Documen
t



Lake Superior called `early victim of climate change'; The largest lake in the world is showing itself to be an extremely sensitive indicator of global warming, said scientists in Duluth, adding that the time to change is now.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 31, 2007 Wednesday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8B
Length: 642 words
Byline: Larry Oakes, Staff Writer
Dateline: Duluth, Minn. 
Body


Like ice sheets melting in the Arctic, Lake Superior has begun showing some of the world's most tangible evidence of global warming, according to scientists gathered in Duluth this week.
The lake's average winter ice cover is 50 percent smaller than it was 100 years ago, a study found. Since 1980, the water on average in summer has warmed almost 2 degrees Fahrenheit per decade, which is twice as fast as the air has warmed. During that time, wind speeds in the middle of the giant lake also have risen steadily.
"In many ways, you in the Lake Superior basin are the canary in the mine," said David Phillips, senior climatologist at Environment Canada. "Lake Superior is really one of the early victims of climate change."
Worldwide, warmer weather and stronger storms could affect everything from the survival of certain plants and animals to transportation to sewage treatment overflows. But the 400 or so scientists at the "Making a Great Lake Superior Conference" said there's still time to minimize the long-term environmental and economic damage, and to adapt to shorter-term changes that can't be averted.
Individuals, corporations and governments must "mainstream climate change" into their thoughts, plans and projects, said Joel Scheraga of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Global Change Research Program.
Failure to plan could result in more disasters such as the damage done to New Orleans by Hurricane Katrina, he said.
The absence of ice
Prof. Jay Austin said that when he learned that Lake Superior water was warming twice as fast as the air above it, he wondered, "Why is Lake Superior so sensitive to climate change?"
Austin and fellow professor Steve Colman, both of the Large Lakes Observatory at the University of Minnesota Duluth, conducted research to find out.
The answer was ice, or the lack of it, Austin told fellow scientists at the conference Tuesday. Until the last decade or so, harsher winters and cooler average temperatures caused Lake Superior to substantially freeze over in winter. A warming climate has caused ice cover to diminish.
"Ice reflects sunlight back out into space, and it can't be used to heat up the lake," Austin said. "If you take away the ice, you allow the lake to warm up earlier."
Prof. John Magnuson of the University of Wisconsin-Madison showed that the region's inland lakes also are losing days of winter ice cover. Twenty years ago, lakes that lost their ice by April 15 were roughly in the latitude of the Twin Cities. But that "ice-out" line has marched steadily north, until in recent years, lakes 100 miles north of the Twin Cities lost their ice by April 15, his maps showed.
Lake levels affected
Less ice exposes the surface of Superior, the world's largest lake, to more evaporation. The scientists say this undoubtedly played a role in the lake reaching record low monthly levels over the summer, as the region was also in the grip of a drought.
Above-normal rainfall has caused the lake level to rebound since then to near normal levels.
People should be concerned about such trends, but they shouldn't panic or lose hope, said Scheraga, the EPA program director.
Knowing that storms may be stronger is already prompting cities to design sewer systems to handle larger overflows and treat potentially polluted runoff, he said. Similarly, engineers in extreme northern reaches are adjusting building foundation standards and building practices to compensate for dwindling permafrost.
As people work to reduce emissions that are driving the trends, they must also continue to adapt to them because greenhouse gases already in the atmosphere will remain there for a long time, the scientists said.
"We know what to do," said Phillips, the Canadian climatologist. "We just need to have the commitment. It's solvable. Let's not worry our young people about the future."
Larry Oakes - 1-218-727-7344

Load-Date: November 6, 2007


End of Documen
t



CLIMATE CHANGE
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
March 8, 2017 Wednesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2017 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 833 words
Byline: TIM RECKMEYER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: A tornado in early March? In Minnesota? Really? // This state needs leadership in the "Noah's Ark" caucus, which has representation from 14 states so far. To join the caucus, you must bring along someone from across the political aisle. Go out there and find a colleague.


Body


It's not your imagination. Minnesota winters just aren't what they used to be. Tornado watches on March 6? Since when does that happen in Minnesota? Until Monday - never.
The reality is that society's collective use of dirty energy has warmed Minnesota winters an average of almost six degrees Fahrenheit since 1970, which effectively makes Minnesota's winters shorter, less intense and nothing resembling a normal Minnesota winter. While that might sound good at first, especially to this imported Arizonan, it comes with consequences for winter recreation, businesses and our health.
In colder climates, like ours, winter-based recreational activities, like skiing, ice fishing, and snowmobiling are less prevalent. This has effects on local businesses and kids who just want to play pond hockey throughout winter. The frequency of Lyme disease in Minnesota is increasing because more disease-carrying insects, like ticks, survive milder winters. Allergy season is already 21 days longer than it was in 1995, and pollen counts are rising, which can trigger respiratory illnesses for allergy sufferers. This can have deadly implications for children and the elderly.
The most important actions we can take are to support smart progrowth economic policies that reduce our energy waste and fully embrace clean energy to power our modern world. Doing so will stabilize our climate and winters, reduce the risks of further damage to our economy, and immediately provide better health via cleaner air and water.
These policies would help steer America toward a path of more durable economic growth by encouraging technological innovation and large-scale substitution of existing energy sources. They also would provide much-needed regulatory relief to U.S. industries. Companies, especially those in the energy sector, finally would have the predictability they now lack, removing one of the most serious impediments to capital investment.
Perhaps most importantly, there are policies that speak to the increasing frustration and economic insecurity experienced by many working-class Americans. These policies would elevate the fortunes of frustrated citizens by generating millions of jobs. Many working-class Minnesotans will find high-wage work producing locally made energy that cannot be outsourced to other countries.
Simply put, these policies are pro-economic-growth, pro-jobs, pro-competitiveness, and great for working-class Americans.
The problem is that right now, America's de-facto energy policy is the socialization of pollution from dirty energy, and Republican leadership, until very recently, has been missing. Thankfully, this is quickly changing. President Trump recognized the risks of rising seas from a warming world to his golf course in Ireland and requested permission from Ireland to build a sea wall. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, during his confirmation hearings, spoke about free-market policies that can avoid climate risk. In mid-February, seminal leaders of the Reagan coalition - such as former Secretaries of State George Schultz and James Baker III began speaking out on solutions that would modernize our energy systems while simultaneously growing our economy and increasing our competitiveness with China and India in the clean-energy economy.
The timing of these Republican leaders speaking out couldn't be better, because volunteers with Citizens' Climate Lobby (CCL) have worked with members of Congress to establish the Climate Solutions Caucus, otherwise known as the "Noah's Ark" caucus. It is aptly named, because to join the caucus you must bring a member from across the political aisle with you. Per documents filed with the U.S. Committee on House Administration, "The caucus will serve as an organization to educate members on economically viable options to reduce climate risk and protect our nation's economy, security, infrastructure, agriculture, water supply and public safety."
Today there are 13 Republicans and 13 Democrats in the caucus, and it's expected to grow, two by two, in the coming months. These politicians represent 14 states and include Republicans from Illinois, Nebraska and Utah. Minnesota is not represented - yet.
Minnesotans currently carry the burden of socialized pollution, and the very real costs associated with it. With the right leadership from the state's elected officials, that can change. There are multiple CCL chapters around Minnesota, with hundreds of volunteers. We represent a broad political coalition of Republicans, Democrats, Libertarians and independents in every congressional district. We encourage you to find a colleague from the other side of the aisle and join the bipartisan Climate Solutions Caucus that is chaired by Reps. Carlos Curbelo, R-Fla., and Ted Deutch, D-Fla. Your constituents will support you.
Tim Reckmeyer lives in Prior Lake with his wife and two daughters. He is the leader of the Scott County chapter of Citizens' Climate Lobby. You can reach him at scottcounty@citizensclimatelobby.org

Load-Date: March 13, 2017


End of Documen
t



Prepare for impact of climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
January 20, 2013 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2013 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2OP
Length: 820 words
Highlight: Research, infrastructure improvements can help state adapt.


Body


If last year's March warmth, June deluge, July heat and autumn drought didn't convince doubters that global climate change has come to Minnesota, last week brought fresh evidence for them to consider.
The John Beargrease Sled Dog Marathon, canceled last year and in 2007 because of insufficient snow, faces the same problem this year and has been postponed. Organizers hope the race can be run in March.
And three state House committees spent nearly two hours listening to five University of Minnesota scientists explain that the Beargrease and many other Minnesota weather-related traditions are in jeopardy.
Their troubling presentation generated rapt attention among members of the House capital investment, legacy, and environment/natural resources/agriculture committees. A few climate change skeptics among committee members made their presence known. But most of the several dozen legislators in attendance seemed sobered and persuaded by what they heard.
That response is heartening. Meeting the challenges climate change is bringing Minnesota will require enlisting a broad range of resources, including state policy and the public purse.
The professors explained that dramatic changes in the state's natural environment have begun and are expected to continue unless carbon dioxide levels in the planet's atmosphere are reduced.
That matches the conclusion of the U.S. Global Change Research Project, whose new report earlier this month said the American Midwest could see another 4.9-degree increase in average temperatures by midcentury.
That much heat, added to the 3-degree increase already seen in parts of Minnesota in the last 30 years, would mean more and longer droughts; more precipitation arriving in the form of damaging thunderstorms accompanied by tornadoes; the retreat of coniferous forests; more invasive plants and aquatic life, and longer growing seasons.
Not all of the changes are undesirable. For example, said agronomist Nicholas Jordan, the ability of Minnesota farmers to grow perennial as well as annual crops could enhance farm income. Adding field pennycress, a groundcover plant valuable for livestock feed and oil production, alongside soybeans could boost farmers' bottom lines by $300 per acre, he said.
But even the welcome parts of the forecast would require adaptation by Minnesotans who interact with the natural world -- in other words, just about everyone.
It's good that the same research institution that has helped Minnesotans make the most of nature since pioneer days, the University of Minnesota, is on the job. A larger role should be in the offing for the 104-year-old Extension Service, which ought to climb on funding priority lists.
Farmers who in the not-distant past worked to remove excess water from their fields may soon need to deploy water conservation tactics. Forest management may involve introducing desirable species of trees to get ahead of invasive less-desirable varieties.
University research should guide such decisions. The U's state funding request for 2014-15 includes $36 million over two years earmarked for research, including how to keep human water supplies clean and food resources sufficient. Legislators should see the importance of that work and affirmatively respond.
Legislators also should shape infrastructure investments with climate change in mind. For example, House capital investment chair Alice Hausman, DFL-St. Paul, proposes that for every $1 the state spends repairing flood damage, it should spend a matching $1 on efforts that would prevent future flooding, such as wetlands restoration.
Minnesotans who resist more state spending should know that floods are already costing state taxpayers a hefty sum. Between 2000 and 2012, Minnesota has issued $355 million in bonds to pay for flood-mitigation projects. Unless the public sector can better anticipate floods and act to lessen the toll they take, "we could find ourselves spending half of our bonding bills repairing flood damage in a few years," Hausman said.
That's the kind of analysis that the latest Minnesota climate-change forecasts should be generating in both the public and private sectors. As forestry Prof. Peter Reich told the House committees, scientists may still be debating the magnitude of the changes that are coming. But they do not disagree about the direction of the trend line. It's going to get warmer, stormier and drier here. Minnesotans should get ready.
PACE OF CHANGE
"What we have to adjust to is a pace of change more rapid than our predecessors had to cope with in this state. ... If we want to continue to live in the manner that we've grown accustomed to, and we want generations that follow us to have the same opportunities and enjoy the same environment we have, we absolutely have to acknowledge this and make adjustments for it."
MARK SEELEY, University of Minnesota professor and extension climatologist, to a Minnesota House Committee, Jan. 15

Load-Date: January 21, 2013


End of Documen
t



Report: Climate change may scar Great Lakes area; Scientists' group sharpens focus on effects of warming climate on farms and cities.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
February 12, 2006 Sunday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2006 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4B
Length: 382 words
Byline: Bill McAuliffe, Staff Writer
Body


More extreme heat events and heavier rain and snow will present even more challenges to cities and farms in the Great Lakes region than previously thought, according to an update on climate change by the Union of Concerned Scientists.
Heat and precipitation extremes, both envisioned as likely results of a warming climate, could harm agriculture through untimely flooding, increased pests, threats to plant structure and stress on livestock and dairy animals. Heavy rains on increasingly developed areas could produce more urban flooding, while more stagnant warm air masses would increase the severity of urban air pollution incidences, according to the update.
The findings underscore the combined effects of global climate change and urban and rural development, said Dr. Lucinda Johnson, associate director of the Center for Water and the Environment of the Natural Resources Research Institute at the University of Minnesota Duluth.
Johnson, who had a hand in the update, noted that the effects of a warming climate are expected to be elevated in the Northern Hemisphere and particularly in the interior regions far from the tempering effects of the oceans, such as the Upper Midwest.
Most scientists attribute warming temperatures globally to a dramatic increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, which can be traced to the burning of fossil fuels for transportation and to produce electricity.
Mark Seeley, University of Minnesota professor and extension climatologist and meteorologist, noted that Minnesota has indeed shown a strong warming trend, particularly in recent winters. Precipitation is on a pronounced upswing. While poultry and dairy businesses have suffered from heat, Seeley said, positive adjustments in floodplain management and crop and livestock techniques have kept Minnesota crop yields high.
Seth Naeve, a professor of agronomy and plant genetics at the U, noted that increased rain in western North Dakota has been a major reason soybean fields have grown fourfold across that state since 1996. There were 850,000 acres planted with soybeans that year, compared with 3.8 million in 2004 and 3 million in 2005.
MORE ONLINE
The Union of Concerned Scientists' reports, by state, and the new executive summary, are available at www.startribune.com/a938

Load-Date: February 14, 2006


End of Documen
t



Hodges' 2018 budget tackles climate change, housing
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 13, 2017 Wednesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2017 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 818 words
Byline: ADAM BELZ; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Public safety also gets boost in $1.4B Minneapolis budget.


Body


Mayor Betsy Hodges proposed a 2018 budget on Tuesday that's focused on affordable housing and combating climate change, and includes a sprinkling of funding for public safety, the arts and voter outreach.
Standing at a podium alongside the full City Council at noon, Hodges spoke for 45 minutes, and laid out her priorities in the $1.4 billion Minneapolis budget. She proposed raising the levy - the total amount of property tax the city collects - by 5.5 percent, or $17.3 million.
Hodges and all the City Council members are in the midst of a re-election campaign, and, as usual, the budget won't be finalized by the City Council until after the election in December.
Calling climate change "the single greatest threat to our city and our planet," Hodges said, "it is up to cities like ours to lead both the fight against climate change and the work to adapt to it." She proposed spending $6 million on clean energy programs; her budget would help fund those initiatives by raising utility franchise fees by half a percent, or about 57 cents per month for the typical household .
The 472-page budget includes $6 million in new spending for a series of affordable housing programs, funding she said is needed to prevent the displacement of lower-income longtime residents.
"There isn't enough housing, and not the right mix of housing in the right places, to meet all the needs of a rapidly growing city," Hodges said.
The budget adds 40 full-time positions to the city's payroll, bringing the total to 4,192.
In a nod to concerns over safety on Hennepin and First avenues, Hodges proposed funding more nighttime traffic enforcement downtown.
"We're still seeing far too much criminal activity downtown," she said.
She also added funding for body cameras and eight community liaisons who "serve as conduits between the community and the department" at new police Chief Medaria Arradondo's request, she said.
The budget adds one only sworn officer to the Police Department, however, and Council President Barb Johnson said Tuesday she had hoped the mayor would move to bring the count of sworn officers to 900.
"I'm very disappointed in her backing away from her commitment to staff up the police department," Johnson said. "I'm going to dig deep and look where the new spending is going and ask for some accountability about some existing programs before we expand into some new venture."
The levy increase is about 0.7 percent higher than it would be otherwise due to the city's 20-year agreement to invest more in the city's roads and parks. Property taxes cover less than a fifth of the city budget. The other big contributor is charges for services and sales, which include sewer, garbage, recycling and water bills.
Hodges' speech sets in motion a Board of Estimate and Taxation decision on the maximum property tax levy followed by consideration before the City Council.
For an owner-occupied home worth $166,500, the increase in the levy will raise the city portion of a property tax bill by $61, or 7.3 percent. An owner of an apartment building worth $5 million will pay $2,346 more in property taxes, or 6.5 percent.
The mayor spent a good portion of her speech on President Donald Trump, who she said "can wreak untold damage to our country with his authoritarian tactics and his policies of oppression and suppression."
Hodges proposed the creation of a new city Office of Immigrant and Refugee Affairs, and funding for the arts and a centralized data practices request system to allow the city to be more responsive to reporters.
"Today, we get to take another step toward creating a Minneapolis that fully lives into our shared values, invests in what we value, and drives tirelessly toward the results our city needs," Hodges said.
The mayor said efforts to fight racial equity are embedded in everything the city does, which is why there was no section on it in the budget.
Still, Nekima Levy-Pounds, who's running against Hodges for mayor, said that not having a section on equity is "a slap in the face for communities of color who face the worst racial disparities in the nation.
"The future vitality of our city depends upon our ability to lift up those who are struggling," Levy-Pounds said.
Council Member Jacob Frey, who is also running against Hodges for mayor, said he hadn't studied the budget yet on Tuesday, but "the budget speech felt more like one drafted for a campaign than a budget presentation for the city finances in 2018."
Tom Hoch, another challenger, said Hodges should have had the budget ready a month ago, and the city has "lost ground" on each of her priorities in the past four years. He did not offer specific criticisms.
"We need more than promises," Hoch said. "We need leadership in the mayor's office that will deliver on the people's priorities."
State Rep. Ray Dehn, who is also running for mayor, could not immediately be reached for comment.
Adam Belz · 612-673-4405
Twitter: @adambelz

Load-Date: September 13, 2017


End of Documen
t



10/10/10; Sunday is a special day for those concerned about climate changes.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 8, 2010 Friday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2010 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3B
Length: 274 words
Byline: TOM MEERSMAN; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


Sunday will be 10/10/10, and people concerned about climate change want you to take notice.
A large bike rally and a panel of speakers will draw attention to the issue Sunday in downtown Minneapolis. The effort is part of an international day to raise public awareness and stimulate political action on climate change, which stalled in Congress this year.
WHAT'S HAPPENING
10 a.m.: Bikers will gather at Como Park in St. Paul and ride as a group to Mill Ruins Park near the Stone Arch Bridge in downtown Minneapolis, where ...
2 p.m.: A panel of environmental leaders, legislators, scientists and explorer Will Steger will speak on the need to reduce carbon emissions that contribute to global warming, and ...
Also appearing: two Minnesotans biking across the country to produce a documentary about how Americans are responding with local solutions to climate change.
THE STORY OF 10/10/10
The idea to make 10/10/10 an international day of political action came from Bill McKibben, author and founder of an organization called 350.org.
That name comes from the number -- 350 parts per million -- that many scientists consider the safe amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. The current amount is about 390 parts per million. Climate change activists want to slow down and reverse CO2 concentrations.
EVENTS WORLDWIDE
More than 6,600 are scheduled in 188 countries. Many focus on climate solutions at the local level, such as tree plantings, trash cleanup, ride sharing and clean-energy projects. Environmentalists are also pushing for progress at the upcoming United Nations conference on climate change; it starts Nov. 29 in Cancun, Mexico.
TOM MEERSMAN

Load-Date: October 12, 2010


End of Documen
t



Economists calculate the climate change costs
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 12, 2014 Friday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2014 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D
Length: 683 words
Byline: ADAM BELZ; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: A conference underway at the U aims to spur more substantive economic work on global warming.


Body


The economic cost of greenhouse gas emissions is likely deeper than scholars have been estimating, and the costs are going to be borne unequally across the globe, according to research presented at a conference underway at the University of Minnesota.
"Most studies show the more we learn, I think the more alarming it is," said Michael Greenstone, an economist who heads the University of Chicago's Energy Policy Institute. "Not every study goes in that direction, but the general thrust is that the estimates of the costs are increasing as we learn more."
While scientists have explored in depth the effects of carbon on the climate, economists have been slower to study the economic consequences, said V.V. Chari, director of the Heller-Hurwicz Economics Institute at the U, which is hosting the conference, "Developing the Next Generation of Economic Models of Climate Change."
One ton of carbon emissions costs society about $30, according to current economic models, Chari said, but consensus is growing that the cost is much higher - probably closer to $100 per ton. More economists are
looking into the effects of a warmer climate on mortality, labor productivity and agricultural yields. They're also looking at the effects on energy consumption, which perversely are projected to increase, since more people will presumably use more air conditioning.
"We're getting a much better sense of what things like hurricanes will do," said Greenstone, who is among the small group of economists working to measure specific costs of a hotter climate and today will present a paper on the costs of a warmer climate in rural India.
The study of 43 years of economic data shows that hotter years in rural India cut real wages and agricultural yields by about a tenth each. Also, 7.3 percent more people died in those years.
Those effects were far less severe in urban parts of India, the study found. This difference in costs by geography will mean that some parts of the colder world may hardly feel the economic effect of climate change, while developing countries could see devastating rises in mortality and drops in wages.
"The effect of a very hot day on mortality in rural India is about 20 times larger than it is in the United States," Greenstone said.
Economists are trying to zero in on these costs in order to help set the price of emissions in a cap and trade or carbon tax scheme. Marty Weitzman, a Harvard economist who in February published a paper on the effects of a uniform international carbon price, said it is very difficult to measure the costs.
"We don't know. It's highly uncertain. This is the problem from hell," Weitzman said. "We're really quite uncertain how the system is going to respond in the course of decades, and we're uncertain, I'm afraid, how to model this economically."
Richard Sandor, founder of the Chicago Climate Exchange, said the key is to set a price and let the market work itself out.
"You need to price it, no matter what way you do it," Sandor said. "Once that signal's out there, innovators come in ... and almost always, the initial and forecasted price is higher than the price that's revealed in trading or a tax."
Chari said Heller-Hurwicz is hosting the conference to help spur more substantive economic work on climate change, help shape the public discussion, and contribute to a framework for collective policymaking.
"There's a huge consensus among economists that climate change is an important social problem, that it cannot be cured by decentralized systems, that it requires some collective action," Chari said.
That consensus is not shared among nations, yet.
One obstacle is that poorer countries might find it daunting to make expensive investments switching from fossil fuels to cleaner green energy, Greenstone said. His research, showing that poorer parts of the world can be the most vulnerable, could incentivize developing countries toward faster action.
"Yes, on one side it will be quite expensive for them to do this," he said. "But on the other hand, the benefits might be disproportionate as well."
Adam Belz · 612-673-4405 Twitter: @adambelz

Load-Date: September 12, 2014


End of Documen
t



Warmer state could be buggier, sicker; A U.N. panel's new report on climate change comes out next month with a focus on regional effects. Scientists say Minnesota could see new disease-carrying bugs and a major impact on water.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
March 30, 2007 Friday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2B
Length: 474 words
Byline: Bill McAuliffe, Staff Writer
Body


Everybody's heard about melting polar ice caps and rising coastal sea levels. But earlier springs, later autumns and milder winters - all notable in Minnesota over the past generation - have also emerged as key symbols of global warming, a panel of scientists said Thursday.
Those factors together could lead to more agricultural production, to the spread of disease and to both the expansion and extinction of some plants and animals, said the three members of the Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change.
In a telephone news conference Thursday, the three scientists - two from Harvard and one from the University of Texas - spoke in advance of the U.N. panel's next report, to be published April 6, which will address regional impacts of climate change.
Their remarks echoed what some Minnesota scientists have been exploring in detail in recent years.
A warming climate will likely enhance the continuing spread of disease-carrying ticks and mosquitoes, said Mike Osterholm, director of the University of Minnesota's Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy.
A warming climate may also accelerate the rate of species change in Minnesota's forests, which Lee Frelich, University of Minnesota forest ecologist, has already detected.
"We think outbreaks of native insects as well as other insects invading will be a major way the forest will change,'' Frelich said.
Osterholm said he thinks global warming will have its greatest human impact where it reduces water resources, either through evaporation, intensified agricultural uses, pollution or simple increased human population.
"We're not going to see the melting of the poles," Osterholm added. "But we could see some major impact on water, and that's where Minnesotans have to be concerned. Minnesota is all about water."
The release from the Climate Change panel next week will be part of on ongoing refinement of its original report in 1990.
Following next week's report on "Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability," it will release a report on possible mitigations May 4.
Dr. Paul Epstein, associate director of the Center for Health and the Global Environment at Harvard Medical School, said residents of northern climates shouldn't feel relieved by milder winter.
Warmer winters with their mix of ice, fog and widely variable conditions could lead to more injuries in car accidents and falls on ice, he said.
Matt Simcik, an associate professor at the University of Minnesota's School of Public Health, agreed.
"There may be less cold-related stress in winter, but more heat-related stress in summer," he said.
Bill McAuliffe - 612-673-7646 Blog: startribune.com/airmass
TO READ MORE
In-depth information on global warming and its  effects is available at:
- The Minnesota  Pollution Control Agency, via www.startribune.com/a2522
- The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, www.ipcc.ch

Load-Date: March 30, 2007


End of Documen
t



Warm wind blowing in big changes; Minnesota natural resources officials say global warming appears real to them. And they say a changing climate will have a major impact on the state's fish and wildlife.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
January 10, 2007 Wednesday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS; Pg. 12C
Length: 1163 words
Byline: Doug Smith, Staff Writer
Body


Ducks swim where anglers should be strolling. Deer browse northern forests frosted with just an inch or so of snow. Pheasants peck at food on a snow-free brown landscape.
Meanwhile, snowmobiles and cross-country skis gather dust, and their owners grumble. And anglers use extra caution traveling on some ice-covered lakes.
It's another weird winter in Minnesota. Mild temperatures and a lack of snow and ice have frustrated those who love winter sports. It's been 10 years since the state was smacked with a good old-fashioned winter of cold and snow.
Though some still question whether the string of mild winters is just a quirk of nature or temporary aberration, others, including leaders at the Department of Natural Resources, say they believe we're starting to see the beginnings of global warming caused by greenhouse gases. And the ramifications for the state's natural resources could go beyond significant changes to winter recreation. They say Minnesota's fish and wildlife are being affected now and will be affected in the years ahead - both positively and negatively.
"Some species will prosper under a warmer climate, and some won't do as well,'' said Don Pereira, a senior research biologist at the DNR.
He and DNR colleagues say the evidence is compelling that serious climate change is occurring, and that temperatures are likely to continue warming for the next 50 years even if we reduce the greenhouse gases blamed for the phenomenon.
"I don't think there's any doubt about it,'' said Dave Schad, director of the DNR's Fish and Wildlife Division. The DNR asked Pereira to give a presentation on climate change to the 220 people attending the DNR's annual roundtable meeting in St. Cloud last weekend "to bring hunters and anglers into the debate,'' Schad said.
Everything from deer and pheasants to ducks and walleyes will be affected - or already is.
Walleyes and tullibee
Pereira said some Minnesota lakes have experienced more frequent summer dieoffs of tullibees - also called ciscos - a cold-water species that serves as food for gamefish such as walleyes, northerns and lake trout. Tullibees die when the water gets too warm.
"It was a natural event that always happened in Minnesota, but now it's happening with increased frequency,'' Pereira said. Tullibee numbers in some lakes - including Lake of the Woods, Winnibigoshish, Leech and Mille Lacs -  have been declining for 20 years, he said.
"Which tells us that tullibees ... are in peril and may not persist into the future,'' Pereira said.
They are an important food for walleyes late in the year, he said. "Walleyes aren't going to die off because tullibees are gone, but their productivity is going to decline.''
Pereira said walleye growth in southern Minnesota has been hurt by recent warm summers.
"It's getting too warm for them,'' he said. Walleyes in the Arrowhead region might actually benefit from the warming temperatures, Pereira said. But in other areas walleyes might lose their dominance to warm-water species, such as bass and panfish.
A warmer climate could spell trouble for lake trout, another cold-water species. "The future doesn't look very good at all for them,'' Pereira said. And stream trout need cold, clear water.
"Bass and panfish will prosper and expand, because they do better in warmer climates,'' he said.
All of this has implications for anglers and fisheries managers. For example, it would be fruitless to stock walleyes in a lake that is no longer hospitable to them.
Freeze-outs and ducks
Minnows, carp and other undesirable fish have fouled wetlands and shallow lakes used by waterfowl. Carp stir sediments and root up vegetation, causing degraded water. Cold temperatures and heavy snows normally "freeze out'' these shallow waters, killing the undesirable fish and improving habitat.
"In the early 1980s, it was a rare year we didn't get a winterkill,'' said the DNR's Jack Wingate. "Now it's becoming the rare year we do get a winterkill.''
Said Pereira: "We want those systems to produce ducks, not fish. If you're going to decrease the frequency of winterkill, it's going to make it more difficult to manage those systems to produce ducks.''
An example is Swan Lake, one of the state's premier waterfowl lakes, where carp were discovered a couple of years ago. Officials lowered the water level in hopes of spurring a winter kill. But last winter was too mild, so officials used rotenone to kill the fish last fall. The cost: $160,000.
Deer, pheasants prospering
Whitetails have been thriving of late, aided by mild winters. The DNR keeps a "winter severity index'' to gauge winter severity, and all but one winter in the past 10 have been rated "mild.'' None since 1996-97 have been "severe.'' The deer population, estimated at 1.3 million last fall, has flourished.
"We have a generation of hunters who have grown accustomed to high deer numbers,'' said Schad.
Wildlife mangers used to be able to count on occasional severe winters to help keep the deer population in check. With the recent mild winters, officials have liberalized deer hunting regulations to encourage higher harvests. That trend will continue as the DNR tries to reduce deer densities in some areas.
If the state's climate continues to warm, deer probably will prosper, forcing more management changes.
Meanwhile, pheasants also have been thriving with the mild winters, and Minnesota hunters have had banner seasons of late. Those could become the norm.
Other wildlife suffers
But other species could have problems with a warmer climate.
"We have a bunch of boreal forest species on the southern end of their range - moose, lynx, fisher and martin,'' Schad said. "We may lose some of those species.''
Already moose numbers have declined dramatically in northwestern Minnesota, and studies have said temperature changes might be responsible.
And climate change could change the makeup of our forests and farmlands, officials say.
Pereira said there is strong evidence that even if we reduce greenhouse emissions, the climate will continue to warm significantly over the next 30 to 40 years.
"We are going to have changes in the future that will make life more challenging. We need to get our act together,'' he said. " There's a lot we can do, and we need to move quickly to minimize the impacts if we care about what we are passing on to our kids and grandkids.''
PREDICTING MINNESOTA'S CLIMATE FOR 2095
This map shows climate projections for Minnesota over the next 90 years. If those projections hold  true, there would be major impacts to the state's natural resources, including fish and wildlife, say Department of Natural Resources officials. They believe they are already seeing the effects of climate change.
- Summer. Could resemble that of present-day kansas. Project 7- to 16-degree temperature increase.
- Winter. Could resemble that of a present-day southern Wisconsin or Illinois. Projected 6- to 10-degree temperature increase.
Sources: Union of Concerned Scientists and the Ecological Society of America.

Graphic

 
MAP
PHOTO

Load-Date: January 10, 2007


End of Documen
t



McKnight to join national battle on climate change; The Minnesota foundation intends to contribute $100 million in $1 billion war against global warming.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
March 19, 2009 Thursday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2009 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 624 words
Byline: TOM MEERSMAN, STAFF WRITER
Body


The McKnight Foundation is announcing today that it will spend an unprecedented $100 million over the next five years to attack global warming worldwide.
The state's largest private foundation, McKnight is joining forces with other large U.S. foundations, including the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation and the David and Lucile Packard Foundation, in pledging more than $1 billion to prevent climate change.
McKnight's President Kate Wolford said the highly coordinated strategy among foundations is unique, but that's what is needed.
She called climate change an "extraordinary challenge" that must be addressed within the next decade to prevent irrevocable harm to the planet. "Without immediate action, climate change will put at risk all those served by our programs," she said.
In 2008 the foundation provided $99 million from its $1.6 billion endowment for a variety of programs, including the arts, housing, children and families, sustainable agriculture and the environment. About 70 percent of McKnight grants in 2008 went to Minnesota organizations.
Wolford said the foundation will distribute the same amount of money in 2009. However, some programs will receive smaller grants because McKnight focuses $20 million annually on climate change. The change represents a dramatic "ramping up" internationally of programs originally developed in the Midwest, she said. The foundation is not seeking applications from those who might desire grants; it has committed most of the money to two foundations working on climate change policy and strategy.
About $5 million a year is going to the Energy Foundation, a grant-maker that has received McKnight money to develop renewable and sustainable energy policies in the Midwest that do not rely on coal and other fossil fuels.
Much of the rest will go to the new ClimateWorks Foundation, which has coalitions in several countries with the highest greenhouse gas emissions. ClimateWorks is a network of international philanthropists, policy and clean technology experts. Their goals are to stop building new sources of carbon emissions, to promote a carbon cap and trade system to reduce carbon dioxide emissions in the U.S., and to help establish an international system to reduce global warming gases.
"It definitely is not about sending American experts overseas," said Energy Foundation president Eric Heitz. "It recognizes that the problem is international and that the best minds of the U.S. and China and India and Europe and other places have to work on it," he said. That includes pooling international expertise so that countries can develop their own strategic plans, he said. Those could include policies that encourage energy conservation, more efficient appliances, cleaner fuels, preservation of tropical forests, and renewable energy requirements for utilities that sell electricity.
Michael Noble, executive director for St. Paul-based Fresh Energy, said that McKnight has realized that global warming is an overarching problem that jeopardizes goals that the foundation's programs have funded for decades: housing and health, water quality, natural resources, and health of ecosystems.
"Even though a lot of attention is rightfully focused on how we can get our economy straightened out, the solutions have to be low-carbon, clean energy, and innovative solutions that we can grow our economy without damaging the environment," Noble said. Fresh Energy receives about 20 percent of its budget from McKnight grants.
Wolford said that the scale of the commitments is what is needed to prompt action on multiple fronts for an urgent problem. "It's not only the right thing to invest in, but now is exactly the time when we should make this commitment," she said.
Tom Meersman - 612-673-7388

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: March 25, 2009


End of Documen
t



Climate change trick - more snow
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
December 22, 2019 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 832 words
Byline: GREG STANLEY; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


Snowplow drivers, city engineers and park supervisors across Minnesota are bracing for heavier snowfalls this winter as they come to grips with the way climate change is producing more volatile weather in the state's coldest months.
Much as rising temperatures and extra moisture have caused heavier rainstorms in the summer, climatologists say they are causing more weather extremes in winter, too. So even as overall snowfall has declined or stayed relatively flat in recent years, Minnesota is seeing more blizzards and near-blizzards.
This calendar year, for example, St. Paul has declared eight snow emergencies - typically announced for storms with more than 4 inches of snow - compared with the average three to four per year. And 15 of the Twin Cities' top 20 snowfalls since 1884 have occurred within the past 30 years, including the "thunder blizzard" that shut down much of the metro area last April and 2010's "dome-buster" that collapsed the Metrodome roof.
"It just seems like we're getting bigger swings, where it's either much snowier or much less snowy than before," said Mike Kennedy, director of transportation, maintenance and repair for the city of Minneapolis. "Last winter there just wasn't a whole lot of snow at all until mid-February. Then it started snowing and never stopped."
These snowstorms are hitting even as winter temperatures have steadily climbed over time, said Peter Boulay, assistant state climatologist. "We're still getting our snow," he said. "But snowfall is highly variable, not only from winter to winter but within the same winter as well."
But a shifting climate doesn't simply mean more blizzards. Minnesota is getting much less snow in November, shortening the season on one end, and more snow in April, lengthening it on the other. And in between heavy storms, skies now tend to be clear and sunny, turning winters into bipolar periods that alternate between mild blue-sky days and extreme snowfalls.
These dramatic swings are hard on winter tourism and outdoor sports venues that depend on reliable snowpack. Ramsey County, for example, has seen enough brown Decembers and Januarys that it's accelerating a multimillion-dollar plan to install snow-making machines on some of its cross-country ski trails so its parks can retain tournaments, competitions and high school team practices.
A hallmark of a strong winter is a sustained period with at least a foot of snow on the ground, Boulay said. Those winters have been declining steadily. Over the past 20 years, Minnesota had just nine winters when at least a foot of snow accumulated on the ground. That's down from 13 such seasons over the previous 20 years, Boulay said.
"That deep snow cover is on the decline," he said. "But when you just count the number of days where we [get] 4 or more inches of snowfall, the 2010s have the most we've seen in a while."
These swings can happen abruptly. Even though it saw relatively little snowfall for the first half of the season, last winter ended up being the most costly in nearly a decade for the Minnesota Department of Transportation (MnDOT). That's because February blizzards were so strong and snowdrifts were so high that MnDOT had to make the rare call to shut down Interstates 35 and 90, while bringing in trucks from all over the state to clear roadways.
Despite these challenges, the plow patrols remain undaunted. The swings between mild and severe years only reinforce a long-standing MnDOT rule of thumb: Be ready to clear roads in any part of the state from October through April, said agency spokeswoman Anne Meyer.
"In Minnesota, nothing is too unusual, even though every year is unique," she said. "Plow drivers just have to be - and are - ready to go as soon as October until things really start to warm up. We certainly have a lot of tools in the toolbox to get us through these events."
Extreme precipitation has become most problematic during the spring, when late snowfalls or early rains compound the rush of melting snow, often triggering severe floods. Minnesota is getting 10 to 15% additional precipitation, or more, during the early spring than it did in the early to mid-1900s, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
And lately, the state has seen heavy snowstorms and rainfalls in April. As a result, three of the 10 largest flood events in St. Paul's history have happened since 2011, including a deluge last spring.
Late fall precipitation also jumped by more than 15% throughout the state.
In addition, places like St. Paul seem to be dealing with more "fringe weather" - when rain turns to sleet, sleet turns to snow and then back to rain, said Matt Morreim, street maintenance division manager for St. Paul.
"That's what happened this Thanksgiving," he said, recalling the way streets quickly iced up. "What we've learned is that we need to be out there immediately. ... You can either take care of it immediately, or you're dealing with it for an extended period after."
Greg Stanley · 612-673-4882

Load-Date: January 15, 2020


End of Documen
t



WHAT MINNESOTA EXPERTS HAVE TO SAY; If the climate change isn't too drastic ...; A little global warming could be a good thing for Upper Midwest farmers.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
April 7, 2007 Saturday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 718 words
Byline: Bill McAuliffe, Matt McKinney, Staff Writers
Body


Sick and tired of all that fear mongering about global warming? Take heart, there could be a silver lining.
Predictions of widespread extinctions, flooded cities, drought, famine and water shortages discussed in Friday's international climate change report are just the bleak view of what extreme shifts in temperature patterns could bring. More limited change could mean a longer-growing season and new warm-weather crops that once were off limits.
Here in Minnesota, the longer-growing season could increase yields of corn and soybeans, worth billions to the state's economy. Fragile grape varieties strung up at the state's wineries will more easily survive our winters. And new crops such as winter wheat could take root on Minnesota prairies.
Sure, it's unusual thinking, but you have to celebrate where you can these days. And as long as the changes are within a limited range, they could bring a measure of good news.
"It's actually pretty simple. We might start growing soybeans that have been adapted for Iowa," said Seth Naeve, a professor of agronomy and plant genetics at the University of Minnesota. The Red River Valley, where crop production is limited primarily by the length of the growing season, could see strong benefits, he added.
"But the wait-and-see is what happens with rainfall patterns. Those are the bigger issues," he said.
A more bountiful countryside would result from a long-term regional temperature increase of up to 2 degrees, according to Friday's update from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. But that is on the mild side of the panel's range of calculations, the extreme being a global rise of 11 degrees by 2100. The Minnesota DNR climatology office has calculated the rise in Minnesota's average temperature at 1.8 degrees since 1894; globally the average temperature has risen 1 degree F in the past century.
George Boody, executive director of the Land Stewardship Project, agreed that regions that grow cold-weather crops and varieties will become home to warmer weather crops in time.
"There could be some of those beneficial effects, but there's some ones to be aware of that are not beneficial," he said.
The effects of the more drastic changes in Minnesota's average temperatures and rainfall could include crop losses, erosion, more severe rains, and more wildfires. Warmer conditions may also mean more pests, bacteria and other agricultural enemies, said Mark Seeley, the U's Extension climatologist and meteorologist.
But for now, some growers have already seen some benefits from a warming climate.
Grapes that used to die off over the winter now make it through the season unharmed, said Kyle Peterson, winemaker at Winehaven Winery in Chisago City. The winery has essentially stopped its old practice of covering the vines of the most fragile grape varieties with straw through the winter months, he said.
The grapes survive, but it's still cold enough to produce "ice wine," a sweet dessert wine made from the juice of grapes left to freeze on the vine each fall before they're harvested. The wine is more valuable than ever today because the region in Germany where the wine originated has been too warm since 2002 to produce it, Peterson said.
However, local farmers have feared that the state's bee colonies used for pollination of crops and flowers are inexplicably leaving their hives and not returning.
"The only explanation that we're seeing as an industry is global climate change," Peterson said.
But the climate change that most people now regard as hard science still hasn't caused some growers to change their ways. This spring, flower grower Renee Arcand will turn the earth no sooner than May 20, the date she's used for the past 15 years. Weather remains unpredictable even if the planet is warming up,  said Arcand, who runs her Live Flowers farm in Marine-On-St.-Croix.
POTENTIAL IMPACT IN THE UPPER MIDWEST
- Longer-growing season and increased crop production
- Warmer lakes and rivers
- Plant and animal species migrating from the south; others becoming extinct
- Increased risk to forests from pests, disease  and fire
- Fewer deaths from cold exposure
- More deaths in heat waves
- Lower heating bills
- Higher cooling bills
- Declining air quality in cities
- Fewer transportation slowdowns related to ice and snow
- Less or altered winter tourism

Load-Date: April 9, 2007


End of Documen
t



Climate changes require new strategies; How can Minnesota deal with the costs of a warming climate? An advisory panel's research group suggests one answer is to try implementing a ``cap and trade.''
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
November 9, 2007 Friday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 5B
Length: 433 words
Byline: Bill McAuliffe, Staff Writer
Body


Minnesotans may soon be asked to drive less (or slower) plow less earth and plug in fluorescent light bulbs as part of the effort to combat climate change.
But the most extensive strategy may be one that doesn't yet exist in Minnesota, and few may ever notice: a "carbon market."
A group of business leaders, environmentalists and others has begun examining a free-form system in which large emitters of carbon dioxide, such as coal-burning energy-producers, could buy or sell credits permitting the release of carbon dioxide into the environment.
If it works as intended, such a program could reduce Minnesota's greenhouse gas emissions in 2020 by anywhere from one-eighth to one-third of current levels.
The so-called "cap and trade" system, similar to one that was critical in reducing acid-rain-causing emissions in the 1990s, was one of several dozen global-warming-mitigation strategies hashed over Thursday by the Minnesota Climate Change Advisory Council.
The group, authorized by Gov. Tim Pawlenty and the Legislature last year, has been meeting since April, when it listed several hundred proposals, and recently winnowed those down to about 60.
In recent weeks, the panel's research group began presenting financial and environmental assessments of each proposal. The overall aim is to reduce Minnesota's carbon dioxide emissions by 80 percent by 2050.
Scientists believe that carbon dioxide contributes to global warming that could dramatically alter Minnesota's climate.
Energy production accounts for about one-third of Minnesota's greenhouse gas emissions and for that reason is most likely to be the first sector of the economy to have its emissions capped. Transportation kicks out another 25 percent and buildings another 25 percent, but they are more diffuse and difficult to regulate, noted Jim Turnure, environmental policy manger for Xcel Energy, the state's largest energy provider.
Turnure said emissions caps and the trading system that would emerge would mean higher costs for energy customers, at least until the utilities are able to reduce their emissions below required limits. But Turnure couldn't say how much higher. "Everything depends on how stringent the cap is," he noted.
Minnesota would likely enter into a trading system with other states, similar to markets that already exist in the western United States and New England. North Dakota, Minnesota's neighbor and a leading producer of the coal Minnesota burns, has resisted the idea because it would put coal at a competitive disadvantage.
Staff writer H.J. Cummins contributed to this report.
Bill McAuliffe - 612-673-7646

Load-Date: November 15, 2007


End of Documen
t



Dayton's climate-change work honored
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
March 13, 2019 Wednesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D
Length: 559 words
Byline: JACKIE CROSBY; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


Minneapolis entrepreneur Eric Dayton has been named by the World Economic Forum to a prestigious post as one of the world's most promising leaders under the age of 40.
Dayton, 38, was among 126 people from across the globe selected for a five-year program aimed at helping recipients gain knowledge and contacts to expand their ideas and make a difference in their communities.
Notable alumni include human rights lawyer Amal Clooney, French President Emmanuel Macron, Google co-founder Larry Page and Chinese actress Zhou Xun.
Dayton, son of former Gov. Mark Dayton, is co-founder and CEO of Askov Finlayson, an outdoor clothing company based in downtown Minneapolis' North Loop neighborhood. The company has committed to donating $1 million over a five-year period, beginning in 2018, to companies fighting climate change.
It's part of the Daytons' broader mission to have a "net positive effect" by counterbalancing 110 percent of the greenhouses gases Askov Finlayson produces as part of doing business, such as making and transporting clothing.
"This is a global forum for the exchange of ideas, and an opportunity to create partnerships for problem solving and getting things done," Dayton said Tuesday, not long after learning he had been selected. "I want to figure out how to make this a productive experience."
The group, Young Global Leaders, was nominated for consideration and selected by a panel of the World Economic Forum, a nonprofit based in Geneva whose goal is to help solve society's biggest problems by bringing together leaders in business, politics, academia, the arts, technology and social change.
More than half of the class of 2019 are women and many are from emerging countries. They include the founder of the first mobile app with contraception advice in Bangladesh, a female scientist working to revolutionize batteries, as well as the Georgian and Costa Rican heads of state. Venezuelan opposition leader Juan Guaido also was on the list, though not all who are selected accept the invitation, a spokeswoman said.
Individuals were selected for "representing the best of their generation, for their ability to enhance understanding and promote action, as well as innovate activity in the fields of art, business, civil society, energy, government and health," according to a news release.
Dayton, who also owns the Bachelor Farmer cafe and Marvel Bar with his brother, Andrew, has blended his businesses with his personal passion for fighting climate change.
As a youth he became interested in wilderness backpacking, and in his 20s, he climbed Denali, where part of his team was buried in an avalanche. Dayton trekked via dog-sled teams through the Canadian Barrens with Arctic explorer and Minnesota native Will Steger, whom he met through his father.
Dayton said he hopes his earth-friendly business model can set an example of what's possible and inspire others in the group, who can partake in any World Economic Forum conferences as well as educational workshops designed for the young entrepreneurs.
"The mission of our company is to keep the north cold," Dayton said. "It's something I'm thinking and working on every day. It's not a goal that can be accomplished in isolation. There's no better example of a global challenge that requires global coordination and cooperation."
Jackie Crosby · 612-673-7335 Twitter: @JackieCrosby

Load-Date: March 13, 2019


End of Documen
t



Slow down to slow climate change?; A state panel is recommending some lower speed limits and cleaner cars as part of a package of proposed new rules, but some critics say that doesn't go far enough. - Correction Appended
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
January 25, 2008 Friday, Metro Edition


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2008 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 782 words
Byline: Bill McAuliffe, Staff Writer
Body


Tougher emissions standards for new cars, a return of nuclear energy and even lower speed limits could be part of Minnesota's future under a package of recommendations endorsed Thursday by a state climate change panel.
After nine months of analysis, the Minnesota Climate Change Advisory Group approved policies, incentives and studies of long-range options that could reduce the state's greenhouse gas emissions by two-thirds by 2025. An official from the Center for Climate Strategies, the research and consulting firm working with the panel, indicated recently that the panel's recommendations could save Minnesota families, businesses and government $9 billion by 2025.
That would put Minnesota well down the road toward the goal of an 80 percent reduction by 2050, which was  established by Gov. Tim Pawlenty and the Legislature last year.
The group's work will go to Pawlenty next week, and he will forward possible bills to the Legislature.
However, the group's recommendations will not include stringent emissions standards for two proposed coal-burning power plants.
That move prompted one key legislator to say the findings simply "rearranged the deck chairs on the Titanic."
"They're not doing the job we asked them to do," said Sen. Ellen Anderson, DFL-St. Paul. "There's a big, big hole in their recommendations."
The panel of more than 50 citizens from utilities, industry, environmental and other groups first voted in favor of stringent standards for new coal-burning plants. Then, led by a majority of panelists from utilities and other business interests, it exempted the proposed Mesaba coal-gasification project in northern Minnesota and the proposed Big Stone II plant in eastern South Dakota from those standards.
Chuck Dayton, a retired environmental attorney and member of the panel, said that vote will "lead the public to believe that we're doing something when we're not."
But he noted that the exemption vote was close enough (23-18) to show that "... there's a lot of opposition among the public to building coal plants."
In any case, neither of the proposed plants is a sure thing, due in part to questions about power demands as well as new environmental regulations and possible new technologies. An administrative law judge panel has recommended that state regulators halt the Mesaba plant. The Big Stone II plant, while in the permitting process, has lost two of its partner utilities.
Nine hours of discussion
Chuck MacFarlane, president of Otter Tail Power, one of the Big Stone partners, said the plant would be "one of the most efficient plants in the United States in terms of carbon dioxide emissions." But it would emit 68 percent more carbon dioxide than the standard that the climate change panel might have imposed.
State law passed last year already calls for utilities to produce 25 percent of their energy from renewable sources by 2025, and Pawlenty has urged coal-burners to use carbon "offsets" to negate their carbon dioxide emissions.
In an e-mail Pawlenty spokesman Brian McClung wrote that the governor expects the recommendations to lead to a "cleaner and more secure energy future." Because Mesaba and Big Stone were already in the pipeline, the panel's vote  "is consistent with last year's Next Generation Energy legislation that passed with overwhelming, bipartisan  support from the Legislature."
In nearly nine hours of discussion Thursday, the panel recommended adoption of emissions standards for new cars that the federal Environmental Protection Agency has barred from being enacted in California. They are now the subject of litigation involving 17 states, including Minnesota.
That and a measure to reduce some rural speed limits drew almost as many objections as the coal plant emissions standard that was halted. But the other rules were approved as having a majority of support.
Edward Garvey, director of Minnesota's Office of Energy Security, who has co-ordinated the panel's work, said he expects to present to Pawlenty next week a package of ranked recommendations based on "how we, as the administration, think we can implement and achieve goals."
The recommendations will not be "filtered or edited," he said, but they might include concerns for impact on low-income and minority populations. That issue was raised several times Thursday by a group called Environmental Justice Advocates, which presented the panel with "principles for climate justice."
Bill McAuliffe - 612-673-7646
Correction


This article on Page B1 incorrectly reported the estimate of greenhouse gas reductions that would be accomplished by 2025 under a package of proposals from the Minnesota Climate Change Advisory Group. It would be 30 percent.
Correction-Date: January 26, 2008


Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: January 31, 2008


End of Documen
t



Nature diarists now scientists; By watching their back yards and taking notes during walks, phenologists are feeding data to the experts on global climate change.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
February 27, 2010 Saturday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2010 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 917 words
Byline: BILL MCAULIFFE; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


On New Year's Day 35 years ago, Larry Weber was out walking when a flock of goldfinches flew over.
That's unusual, Weber thought. He made a note of it -- and he's been making similar notes for the 13,000 days since then.
That makes Weber a phe-nol-o-gist -- a person who watches and records bird migrations, insect hatches, plant blooms and other events in nature.
It's also put the retired Duluth teacher and nature author at the front of an effort to elevate the folksy field of phenology into a key tool for studying climate change.
"We want it taken seriously," said Weber, who helped organize a conference of Upper Midwest phenologists north of Duluth at Isabella, Minn., this weekend.
The first annual Northwoods Phenology Conference comes at a time when nature-watching networks are springing up nationally and the field is taking on some scientific and academic juice. Projects at Harvard University and the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee are using ground-level observations to check the accuracy of satellite observations of trees.
That could lead to a more comprehensive -- read "global" -- assessment of how seasons are changing and a better understanding of how and when trees are producing or absorbing carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Meanwhile, the University of Arizona, which helps coordinate a national phenology network, is advertising for a professor of "phenoclimatology."
"If I was doing this 10 years ago, no one would really take it seriously," said Andrew Richardson, a Harvard assistant biology professor who's doing a satellite/ground tree study. "It was sort of seen as more natural history. But phenology has been shown to be such a sensitive indicator of the biological effects of climate change that it's being seen as a more important field of study."
After centuries, respect
Phenology has a long tradition, going back through Henry David Thoreau and Thomas Jefferson to the Japanese who recorded observations of cherry blossoms 1,000 years ago. It's frequently confused with phrenology (with an "r"), a snake-oil-based field that purports to link skull shape to personality. But the confusion may not continue much longer.
At one end of the field, Richardson, at Harvard, is using automated cameras to supplement human observers in a climate-tracking satellite project. He calls it "a new way of doing phenology." At the other, phenologists both in academia and in back yards, including those at the Northwoods Conference, are aiming to establish repositories for data and a common language, so observers and researchers can compare consistent data.
Jim Latimer, who's been taking nature notes on his 100-mile daily mail route outside Grand Rapids since 1983 and hosts a weekly phenology radio show on KAXE-FM, said right now it's hard to tell what any phenologist means by something as apparently simple as lilac bloom.
"What is 'bud burst' and what is 'first flower'?" said Latimer, who is also a Northwoods Conference organizer. "Is the first flower when the first [floret] opens, or when the whole bloom cluster is in flower? We need definitions."
Citizen science
Mark Schwarz, a climatologist and geography professor at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee who is chairman of the USA National Phenology Network, noted that phenology has really gained steam in the past decade, in tandem with concern over climate change.
He advocates widespread attention to a few species across the country, which might be contrary to the pleasant, easy, Farmer's Almanac-y randomness that has characterized phenology. But even Ph.D.-equipped phenologists agree that back yard observers -- motivated not by research grants but by curiosity, a love of the outdoors and what Latimer called a tendency toward compulsive note-taking -- are becoming valuable players in climate research.
Minnesota phenologist Jim Gilbert, for example, has noted that lilacs near his home in Waconia now bloom about two weeks earlier than they did 40 years ago. Latimer has documented that the ice on a slough near his home forms 12 days later in the fall, on average, than it did 25 years ago.
Rebecca Montgomery, a University of Minnesota forest ecology professor and keynote speaker at the Northwoods gathering, describes the amateur phenologist as "an incredibly rich resource" that is helping shape climate research.
"The citizen scientists, because of their passion for collecting phenology data, have, I think, played a role in where the science has been going," she said.
But can it still be good, clean fun?
"All I am, basically, is an observer. I'm not a scientist," said Latimer, who continues to build on one of the longest active records on showy lady's slippers, the Minnesota state flower. "My hope is that someone smarter than me can take the data I've collected, compare it with other people's, and say, 'Here's what's happening.'
"I've got a degree in economics," Latimer added. "I came to it because I love it. It's a calling."
Bill McAuliffe - 612-673-7646
Seeing the signs
Things phenologists might be noting as February turns to March:
- Chipmunks emerging from burrows
- Goldfinches showing hints of yellow
- Tree buds swelling
- White oaks dropping last year's brown leaves
- Early greenery beginning to show up under retreating south-facing snowbanks
- Snow fleas on top of snow on warm days
- In northern Minnesota, bald eagles building their nests
- Asian lady beetles, box elder bugs and flies emerging indoors in warm window areas or even outside on the south-facing warm sides of buildings
BILL MCAuliffe

Load-Date: March 2, 2010


End of Documen
t



'Truth' and dare; Al Gore presents a powerful argument on climate change - although some may disagree about the scientific nuances.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
June 9, 2006 Friday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2006 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: SCENE; Pg. 13F
Length: 708 words
Byline: Colin Covert, Staff Writer
Body


Hot enough for you? Even in the air-conditioned cocoon of a movie theater, Al Gore's primer on global warming, "An Inconvenient Truth," will have viewers wiping away sweat. It paints an unnervingly convincing picture of manmade climate change that is pushing our planet toward meltdown.
Gore's movie has three objectives: to inform viewers of the facts, persuade them to act and entertain in the process. While the latter two goals are fair game for a movie reviewer, weighing the facts demands specialized expertise. University of Minnesota climatologist and meteorologist Mark Seeley viewed the film with me and shared his reactions. They were decidedly mixed. More on that soon.
While cynics might groan that Al Gore + lecture + global climate dynamics = a trifecta of tedium, "An Inconvenient Truth" is a riveting piece of filmmaking. Far from a dry presentation of statistics and charts, it is a fast-paced, slickly produced multimedia briefing about the causes and consequences of climate change.
In a filmed version of the lecture he has delivered on stages around the world, Gore and director Davis Guggenheim present the issue as an emotionally engaging morality play. There's a victim (Mother Earth), a villain (carbon dioxide from fossil fuels), a band of heroes (eco-conscious consumers and voters who may yet save the day) and a lesson (planetary disaster looms unless we act).
With dramatic scenes of melting ice caps, retreating glaciers, record heat waves, intensifying hurricanes and plaguelike eruptions of insects and disease, the film vividly illustrates what the former vice president calls our "nature hike through the Book of Revelation."
He argues that our ability to rationalize and ignore imminent threats, combined with disinformation and doctored science from defenders of the status quo, has put us perhaps a decade from a point of no return. To drive home the seriousness of the situation, Gore quotes Winston Churchill on the spread of fascism in the 1930s: "The era of procrastination, of half-measures, of soothing and baffling expedients, of delays, is coming to a close. In its place we are entering a period of consequence."
That consequence could be disastrous. Slides show how a breakup of polar ice could submerge Beijing; Calcutta, India; Manhattan; San Francisco, and the Netherlands. The film ends by listing dozens of ways we can reduce carbon dioxide emissions and influence policymakers. Gore is no showman, but his patiently constructed case is a compelling call to action.
A scientist's view
As for its accuracy, climatologist Seeley, who describes himself as a liberal-leaning conservationist, called the film well-intentioned but seriously flawed.
If Gore had offered the film as his Ph.D. dissertation, "I would have failed him," Seeley said. Gore presents debatable conclusions "without question and without any differing opinion," and focuses too narrowly on the harmful effects of carbon dioxide, which also is a boon to plant life, he noted. The Northern Hemisphere's temperature increase in the past century also can be explained by changes in solar activity, deforestation, loss of wetlands and land-use change, but "the uncertainties and optional explanations are never even alluded to."
What's more, Seeley said, Gore "completely neglected the most significant greenhouse gas on Earth, which is water vapor. We couldn't live if it weren't for water vapor." He also thinks Gore is on shaky ground attributing a wide array of hurricanes, blizzards and storm episodes to global warming.
Do such shortcomings negate Gore's overall message that the earth is warming, human activity plays a role in that change and something must be done? Not at all, Seeley said.
"Though we can argue until we're blue in the face about the causes of climate change, there's unanimity among scientists that climate is changing. And our vulnerability [in terms of ] human mortality [and] economic loss ... is going up exponentially.
"We do as human beings affect the environment and we have to find ways to better treat the Earth. I think that's a great message to get out to people."
Colin Covert - 612-673-7186
AN INCONVENIENT TRUTH
3 out of four stars
Rating: PG for some thematic elements.
Where: Uptown Theater and Lagoon Cinema.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: June 9, 2006


End of Documen
t



Pawlenty goes equatorial on the polar cap; Still, he was friend on climate change for a spell, and it helped, says Will Steger.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
August 30, 2009 Sunday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2009 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3OP; Opinion Exchange
Length: 825 words
Byline: NICK COLEMAN
Body


Politics makes strange sled-fellows.
Two years ago, Gov. Tim Pawlenty teamed up with polar explorer Will Steger, becoming part of a highly publicized "odd couple" that helped Minnesota forge into a national leadership role on global climate change and renewable energy. There was even talk of Pawlenty joining a Steger expedition to the Arctic to witness, from the runners of a dogsled, the shrinking polar ice cap.
Today, however, the rapid disappearance of the ice cap is more than matched by the evaporation of Pawlenty's leadership on an issue that Steger says carries as much moral urgency as it does environmental and economic importance.
Since early last year, when he began preening to be John McCain's choice as a running mate, Pawlenty (who is not seeking a third term as governor) has tried to elevate his national prospects by appealing to the deeply conservative base of the Republican Party. His ambitions have led him to jump from Steger's sled and largely abandon his goal to make Minnesota a model for fighting global warming, reducing greenhouse gases, and jump-starting an alternative growth economy by finding renewable, green-energy sources that might wean us from carbon and produce jobs.
It has been one of Tim Pawlenty's most cynical reversals. And the truth, says Steger (who says he remains close to Pawlenty), is that the governor knows better.
Pawlenty's about-face began while he was still in the midst of a series of climate change forums with Steger that were held across the state. He bailed before the final forum and never looked back. A governor who declared himself a champion of clean energy when he was chairman of the National Governors Association has now bowed so low to his party's "Drill, Baby, Drill" faction that he called on the state's congressional delegation in June to vote against the American Clean Energy and Security Act, which embodied most of the very principles he had embraced when he hitched himself to Steger's visionary crusade.
The bill passed the House and will now go to the Senate. But by throwing red meat to red-state Republicans (embracing "clean coal" and nuclear energy, repeating hoary tales of job losses and wildly exaggerated cost estimates), Pawlenty turned his back on a broad-based bipartisan Minnesota movement that he had helped start and that included a full spectrum of interests, from energy companies to environmental advocacy groups.
Environmental advocates have been angered by Pawlenty's abandonment of the climate change/clean energy fight. (Major recommendations approved by a "stakeholders panel" appointed by Pawlenty were orphaned when Pawlenty dropped the issue.) Some have questioned Steger's choice of partners, arguing that Pawlenty could not be trusted to stay the course. But Steger is philosophical about his old trailmate, saying that Pawlenty helped advance the cause in Minnesota even if he chooses to betray it on a national stage.
"I understand why people are angry," says Steger. "He's definitely stepped back and dropped things he was doing. He knows it (climate change) is real, and I believe he sees the moral implications of not doing anything. But he's running for the Republican side, and it's a real hot potato. That's politics, but it's a shame, because drilling and digging as fast as we can do it won't make us secure. That's how we got into this mess. Conservatives should see that we will have energy security and jobs only by developing a low-carbon economy and protecting the environment."
Steger says he is a realist and that Pawlenty's strong, if short-lived, commitment to the global warming battle has made Minnesota a better place, raising the issue to a higher level of awareness. Not even Tim Pawlenty could win office in Minnesota, Steger says, if he clung to the nostrums he's peddling to national Republicans.
"It's not a very electable platform here," Steger says. "This is a big issue for many people in Minnesota, and I give the governor credit. Some of the strongest climate legislation in the country has been passed under his tenure. Different things get you elected in different places, but the people of Minnesota have gotten on board on this. At the next election in Minnesota, things are going to happen in a big way."
Pawlenty won't be part of that election. Minnesota will get a new governor, and Steger says the work dropped by Pawlenty will be carried on, and that the state will return to its leadership position on issues affecting the country and the planet.
What if lightning strikes and Pawlenty gets elected president in 2012?
"I'll still work with him," Steger says. "I'm a bridge-builder, and when you're a bridge-builder, you get walked on. We need the Republican Party in this fight.
"There's still a long way to go."
Nick Coleman is a senior fellow at the Eugene J. McCarthy Center for Public Policy & Civic Engagement at the
College of St. Benedict/St. John's University. He can be reached at nickcoleman@gmail.com

Load-Date: August 31, 2009


End of Documen
t



Climate change has extended Minnesota's ragweed season
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 16, 2018 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2018 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: SCIENCE+HEALTH; Pg. 1SH
Length: 382 words
Byline: JEREMY OLSON; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


A classically harsh August for weed allergies has given way, so far, to a milder September.
But - sniff, sniff - allergy season might not be over yet.
Drawing on research showing that climate change has lengthened the annual ragweed season by 18 to 21 days in Minnesota, state Health Department officials are warning allergy sufferers to remain on alert.
"Eighteen to 21 days? You're talking three weeks longer!" said Wendy Brunner, a program manager and epidemiologist for the department's asthma program, and an allergy sufferer herself. "That's a much longer time."
An influential 2011 study by Lewis Ziska of the U.S. Department of Agriculture documented the extended ragweed season by reviewing pollen counts in the central United States from 1995 to 2009 and adjusting results based on changing frost and weather patterns. A 2016 update to his research examined the counts through 2015, and found that the growth in ragweed season was more dramatic among northern communities.
Pollen count and weather data over the two decades showed the season had increased by only one day in Oklahoma City, but it had increased by 18 days in Minneapolis, and by 24 days or more in the Canadian cities of Winnipeg and Saskatoon.
The ragweed season in Minneapolis appears to still start in mid- to late July, but then to extend later into September and October, according to Ziska's data.
People with allergies should limit outdoor activities, wear hats and sunglasses to block out pollen, keep windows closed, and immediately wash clothes worn outside, the Health Department advised.
The department also has created a historical pollen count page so people can accurately plan and prepare for changing allergy seasons.
The state data from 1995 to 2016 do not show an increase in the length of the weed allergy season. But Brunner said it reflects raw data, which doesn't account for weather pattern changes from year to year as Ziska did. The state data also show overall weed allergy levels, whereas Ziska's study specifically focused on ragweed.
The most recent year in the state data, 2016, was unusual for its intensity. Weed pollen counts were measured in Minneapolis in the high or very high ranges for 65 days that season. No other season since 2010 had more than 45 such days.
Jeremy Olson · 612-673-7744

Load-Date: September 17, 2018


End of Documen
t



WARM FRONT: Confronting a changing climate
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 22, 2019 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1321 words
Byline: JENNIFER BJORHUS; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: NOWHERE FOR ALL THE WATER TO GO // Minnesota's stormwater systems weren't built for this much rain, and cities can't keep up


Body


Fourth in a series
Snowplowing, recycling and street repairs are all part of the job for Shoreview's public works employees. But the department's fastest-growing budget item these days isn't filling potholes.
It's stormwater.
"Stormwater management issues ... have just absolutely consumed my staff," said Mark Maloney, the city's public works director. And homeowners' calls, he said, have a common theme: " 'Hey, why is everything wet?' "
Across Minnesota, cities large and small are scrambling to upgrade storm sewers, culverts, roadways and drainage ponds as they find themselves deluged by ever-more intense storms and flash flooding. With global temperatures on the rise, this decade is likely to be the wettest in Minnesota history, according to retired state climatologist Mark Seeley.
All that water is overwhelming Minnesota's patchwork of stormwater systems, a huge, aging network of tunnels, pipes and culverts - some of it more than 100 years old - that carries water away to ditches, rivers and lakes. And all of it was designed to handle the climate of the past, said Ryan Anderson, stormwater program manager at the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
Rochester's public works department, for example, set up a special unit to tackle heavier stormwater loads. The city of Hutchinson plans to issue a 15-year bond to pay for a major stormwater upgrade that features a large new retention pond, complete with native plantings and a walking path, constructed on an old baseball field. Minneapolis is grappling with flooded basements and startling sinkholes near Lake Nokomis. And St. Cloud just added a new underground tank and tunnel system to hold and treat stormwater in an area prone to flooding.
By some estimates, the cost of these upgrades statewide could run into hundreds of millions of dollars in coming years, an expense that is likely to turn up in higher utility fees for homeowners and businesses. Nationally, the adaptation costs could reach $12 billion in coming decades, according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Minnesotans see the evidence all around them: soggy lawns, crumbling curbs, flooded intersections, scoured stream banks. Even geysers erupting in the streets.
On the wettest days, stormwater can also wash into sanitary sewers - the pipes that carry sewage and other municipal wastewater to water treatment plants - resulting in emergency discharges of raw or partly treated sewage into Minnesota's lakes and rivers.
Such discharges now occur on average about 147 times a year, up from 120 times a year in the first half of the past decade, according to a Star Tribune review of state data.
To address these new climate realities, cities are upgrading their stormwater systems to handle a higher set of federal rainfall estimates, known as the Atlas 14 standards, that were recalculated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration for Minnesota in 2013. A 100-year storm that used to produce 6 inches of rain in the Twin Cities in 24 hours is now expected to produce 8 inches.
"That's a huge change," said Randy Neprash, a stormwater regulatory specialist with consultant Stantec.
'Now it's just ... yuck'
On the worst days, in many communities, it is still triage: sandbags and pumps.
That's what Little Canada resorted to last spring when Twin Lake gushed over its shores. The small, deep lake, surrounded by older houses and towering trees, has had some flooding in recent years. But nothing like what happened in May and June, when melting snow and spring rains triggered a chain reaction. Put simply, Roseville's stormwater drains into the Shoreview area, and Shoreview's stormwater drains into West Vadnais Lake. When West Vadnais Lake filled up this spring, it spilled over and poured into little Twin Lake.
But Twin Lake is landlocked. With nowhere for the rising water to go, the lake began consuming yards. Residents and city crews responded with sandbags while the City Council took an emergency action to rent a large pump to lower the lake level.
It was a close call, said Val Eisele, who lives on the lake with his wife, Jessie Everts, and their two children. They felt powerless as the lake crept closer and closer to the back door of a house they "scraped and saved" to buy.
"To watch it approach the house is definitely terrifying," Eisele said. "Trees have fallen on people's docks."
Remarkably, no houses flooded. But months later, Stan Martin's backyard remains partly submerged.
"Look at this junk," Martin said one day in August, stepping through mud in the woods down a path on his property's edge. "Logs. Telephone poles ... everything came floating in. People used to come down here and get their wedding photos taken. Now it's just ... yuck."
The frustrated homeowner said he's not convinced climate change caused the flooding. He accused the Ramsey-Washington Metro Watershed District of mismanaging the lake's water flow. Either way, it was a mess.
"It stinks like a swamp," Martin said.
Tina Carstens, the watershed's administrator, said the flooding did result from increased rainfall and elevated groundwater due to climate change.
"Our infrastructure just wasn't built for this prolonged state of high water," Carstens said. "We haven't been here before. It's uncharted territory."
Little Canada's public works director, Bill Dircks, agreed. Standing by the pump near Martin's house in a bright orange vest, Dircks said he grew up in the area and has never seen Twin Lake flood as it did this spring.
"I've never seen the water get to that pipe before," Dircks said, pointing at an old concrete culvert.
To prevent a disaster, the pump has been sucking lake water through a 6-inch discharge pipe that snakes through the old culvert and across a field to a drainage pond dug out alongside Interstate 694. The water then flows under the freeway and eventually to Gervais Creek, which drains to Gervais Lake, which drains to Keller Lake and Lake Phalen, and eventually into a pipe that snakes to the Mississippi River.
The city finally turned the pump off last week, although it's keeping the equipment in place for now.
That episode alone cost the city about $70,000, money that will come from its general operating budget because Little Canada doesn't charge residents a stormwater utility fee. That may change.
Not a permanent fix
Dircks said he's thankful the emergency fix worked. But it's not a solution. That could mean constructing a bypass to prevent overflow from going into Twin Lake.
"This is unprecedented stuff," Dircks said.
Facing a wetter future, Minnesota communities are embracing a changing stormwater design philosophy. Where they once focused on pipes to move runoff someplace else, engineers now aim to mimic nature and manage the water better where it falls. That means building more and larger retention ponds, installing underground filtration tanks, narrowing streets to reduce runoff from pavement and adding more features such as rain gardens, swales and tree trenches to soak up water. The state's Stormwater Manual offers plenty of guidance on dimensions and green infrastructure.
But there's no template, said Shoreview's Maloney.
"We almost have to wait for it to happen to understand the magnitude of it," he said. "I think a lot of Minnesota cities are finding themselves in this situation of dealing with something that was never even thought possible."
Jennifer Bjorhus · 612-673-4683
WETTER AND WETTER
Average precipitation in Minnesota has risen steadily in the last century, including more extremely wet years and fewer extremely dry years.
Annual statewide average precipitation, 1895-2019
1895: 22.67"
2019*: 23.54"
* Through August
(See the page PDF or microfilm for the complete chart.)
Source: NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information
About this series: "Warm Front'' is a Star Tribune series examining the ways climate change is altering Minnesota and the lives of its residents. Read more at startribune.com/warmfront.

Load-Date: October 2, 2019


End of Documen
t



Klobuchar gets lesson in global warming; The senator spent the weekend in Greenland, learning firsthand about climate changes affecting the world.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 30, 2007 Monday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 5B
Length: 406 words
Byline: Bill McAuliffe, Staff Writer
Body


U.S. Sen. Amy Klobuchar returned to Washington on Sunday from a weekend outing to Greenland, where she was looking at melting glaciers and other evidence of global warming as part of a 10-member bipartisan group from the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee. Klobuchar and Sen. Olympia Snowe, R-Maine, who has proposed a national greenhouse gas registry as a means toward tracking and trading carbon emissions, will likely cosponsor a climate change bill expected to be introduced soon.
Q. Did you learn anything on this trip that you didn't know already?
A. Greenland is the canary in the coal mine of climate change. ... One woman talked about how when she was little, ice sheets would cover the area she lived all winter, and now they're planting potatoes. ... At the airport shop they sell seal mittens and beluga whale earrings, things that you can't bring into the United States. It was very unique, from that perspective, to be in a place that's been so isolated for so long.
Q. You could make an argument that being able to grow potatoes in Greenland is a good thing, because you don't have to ship them.
A. And you can make an argument that opening up the (Arctic Ocean) trade route is a good thing. There will be some good things that come out of this, but basically there will be lot of bad things that come out of it, which include rising sea levels, refugees created from all over the world, storms getting worse from the seas heating up. It is a wholesale change in the way we live. I believe if there's some way - and this is what the Conservative Party Environmental Minister from Denmark was saying - if there's some way to slow this down we should do it.
Q. Greenland is under Danish control. If this is a global issue, how can the U.S. Senate affect it?
A. I believe the United States has to lead the way. If we don't lead the way, we're not going to reap the benefits of [climate change mitigation] technology; if we don't set the standards, the technology is going to be developed in places like China and India. The second thing, I believe we should act in concert with the rest of the world to develop an agreement on climate change.
Q. How was the weather?
A. It was raining today, but it was kind of misty. I would say it looked like Greenland should look. Overall it was in the 30s and 40s. ... There's more and more people coming there. It was great to be there when it was untouched.
Bill McAuliffe - 612-673-7646

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: August 1, 2007


End of Documen
t



Class pairs students with Costa Ricans on climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 29, 2013 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2013 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1N
Length: 706 words
Byline: ERIN ADLER; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: A new School of Environmental Studies class partners students with a Costa Rican class to learn about climate change, leadership and service learning.


Body


How many different disciplines can you fit into one class?
A new project at the School of Environmental Studies (SES) in Apple Valley is taking "interdisciplinary" to another level, combining topics such as service learning, cultures around the world, leadership and climate change into a single class.
The course, called the Costa Rica Youth Leadership Program, is a yearlong elective funded by a University of Minnesota grant. After partnering with students from Costa Rica over Skype all school year, half of the 32 students in the class will go on a three-week trip to the country this summer.
The grant, administered through the university's Institute on Community Integration, also stipulates that half of the students traveling to Costa Rica have some sort of disability.
"It is an interesting challenge to weave together all those pieces, but it's fun," said Jane Tunseth, who teaches the class. "It's a fun intellectual challenge."
The grant money comes through the American Youth Leadership Program, a U.S. State Department international exchange program. Students in the class can earn college credit through the University of Minnesota as well, funded by the grant. Tunseth is using curriculum designed by several departments at the university and a nonprofit called World Savvy, as well as adding her own pieces.
Brian Abery, the coordinator of school-aged services at the Institute on Community Integration, said he and another professor wrote the grant because he saw that the American Youth Leadership Program "didn't include very many programs for students with disabilities." The institute's goal is to encourage inclusiveness in education and other areas.
Thus, students in the class and who will go on the trip have a broad range of disabilities, from learning disabilities and mental health issues to cognitive or physical disabilities, Abery said.
"It's a very, very heterogeneous group," Abery said, which "reflects the fact that 10 percent of kids in schools have some sort of disability."
The class also will increase students' cultural competencies, so the students - all juniors - can understand how the things they do here in Minnesota affect people around the world, Abery said.
Tunseth said she's focusing on developing the students' leadership skills as well as service learning. Leadership is a focus at the school, she said. "It's kind of a tricky word," she said. "That's what I hope students get, is that there are lots of different kinds of leaders and everyone can be a leader."
The students will be meeting and learning virtually - through Skype, social media and other means - with students from the Liceo de Poas, a school in Alajuela, Costa Rica. The two classes will work to develop an environmental service project, and in the summer, about half of the SES students will meet the Costa Rican students and stay in their homes. While there, they'll complete the service project they planned together.
Hunter Daraitis, a junior, said that even if he isn't chosen to go to Costa Rica, he knows that "the class would give me a lot of knowledge anyway." He said he's excited about learning about other cultures and how Americans can interact with people from around the world.
Anna Selchow applied for the class because she was interested in the Costa Rica component. She has been to Ecuador and Peru and speaks pretty strong "survival Spanish," Selchow said. "I think it will be really fun, because it's not your typical class."
Some students not selected to go on the trip might choose to go anyway and pay their own way, Tunseth said. There also may be activities organized by the U for the students who stay here.
So far, Tunseth said, she has spent the first weeks explaining all of the class' components. Just learning about all the different agencies involved in climate change and how they approach problems, from the government to a nonprofit to a school in another country, is educational for students, she said.
"What's unique about it is, like most issues that students will have to solve when they're out on their own, it's so complex," she said. "That's the part I'm fascinated by - there are so many angles and players to the issue, which is the way to solve climate change."
Erin Adler · 952-746-3283

Load-Date: October 1, 2013


End of Documen
t



Readers Write; LETTER OF THE DAY; Consider human, not political, cost of climate change bills
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 28, 2010 Wednesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2010 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 171 words
Body


Media coverage of the U.S. Senate's latest postponement of climate change legislation has, as usual, focused on political consequences. Allegations of midterm election nervousness and congressional uselessness are the mainstay. Some articles include forecasts of intensifying climate change unchecked by government action. But human consequences are never placed on the balance scale.
A drought in Minnesota means lawn-watering restrictions. A drought in Malawi means starvation. Specific impacts vary by region, but millions of families in poor countries are suffering from climate change today. Statistics from respected organizations on the front lines like Lutheran World Relief and Oxfam confirm this. Stories from Minnesota's vibrant immigrant communities and Peace Corps veterans eliminate any doubt.
The Senate should not wait until a politically convenient time to vote on a climate change bill. When saving actual lives -- not political lives -- is part of the calculus, inaction is not an option.
ADAM OLSON, MINNEAPOLIS

Load-Date: July 28, 2010


End of Documen
t



'Not a great leader, but a significant one'
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 18, 2020 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2020 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: VARIETY; Pg. 3E
Length: 572 words
Byline: GLENN C. ALTSCHULER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: NONFICTION: This scrupulously researched book depicts Jimmy Carter as a man with a first-class intelligence and a second-class temperament.


Body


Special to the Star Tribune
Jimmy Carter is usually regarded as a failed president and America's greatest former president. In "His Very Best," the first full-length biography of the 39th president, journalist Jonathan Alter (author of "The Defining Moment: FDR's Hundred Days," and "The Center Holds: Obama and His Enemies") maintains that Carter was "not a great leader but a significant one."
Alter's scrupulously researched and judicious book depicts Carter as a man with a first-class intelligence and a second-class temperament; better at sermonizing than mobilizing; a technician rather than a grand strategist, unable to fit his beliefs into a compelling ideological package or combine policymaking with politics; prescient on climate change and human rights; weak on issues that mattered most to voters, the economy and Iran hostage crisis.
Drawing on dozens of interviews, Alter provides a fascinating account of Carter's formative years, where, by the standards of Plains, Ga., Jimmy was a racial moderate: alone in advocating that Blacks be permitted to worship in his church; silent on school desegregation; cozying up (during his race for governor) to the founder of the state's White Citizens Council and George Wallace; declaring in his inaugural address "the time for racial discrimination is over," and appointing African Americans to government offices.
A virtual unknown, running against a weak field, Carter won the Democratic nomination for president in 1976, Alter reminds us, by running as an outsider in a post-Watergate climate of distrust in and disillusionment with government. As president, he never mastered the horse trader's art of working Congress. Nor, Alter indicates, did he appreciate that the presidency "is not just a fishbowl but a theater," a stage from which to project an image.
Alter also provides a candid and often compelling assessment of Carter's policy successes and failures. He tackled the unpopular issue of energy conservation, imposing fuel economy standards and incentivizing renewables; launching initiatives on clean air and water, natural gas, and a Superfund to remove toxic waste; designating vast areas in Alaska and elsewhere as public lands, monuments and parks. Carter failed, however, to follow up on his "malaise" speech. He didn't get Congress to adopt tax or welfare reform, consumer protection or health care.
In foreign policy, Alter acknowledges that the president was slow and unimaginative in responding to developments in Iran. And he suggests that the Camp David Accords may inadvertently have freed Israel to attack Palestinians in Lebanon and build more settlements on the West Bank. That said, critics may find Alter's overall assessment too generous. The world is safer, he asserts, because Carter normalized relations with China. His Panama Canal Treaty "almost certainly prevented a long and bloody guerrilla war again the United States." And the president made human rights "a permanent feature of global political discourse."
After Carter's defeat for re-election, Vice President Walter Mondale proposed a toast: "We told the truth. We obeyed the law. We kept the peace." At the time, Alter writes, "these might have seemed modest accomplishments." But, he implies, not now.
Glenn C. Altschuler is the Thomas and Dorothy Litwin Professor of American Studies at Cornell University.
His Very Best
By: Jonathan Alter.
Publisher: Simon & Schuster, 800 pages, $37.50.

Load-Date: October 18, 2020


End of Documen
t



Native plant conference digs into climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
February 8, 2012 Wednesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2012 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: VARIETY; Pg. 10E
Length: 261 words
Byline: LYNN UNDERWOOD; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


Climate change is a hot topic -- thanks to our unusually balmy winter and the USDA's recently revised Plant Hardiness Zone Map.
How does warmer weather affect native plants and animals? That's the topic of a Feb. 25 conference sponsored by the local chapter of Wild Ones, a nonprofit devoted to environmentally sound landscapes.
"Native plant growers are wondering what climate change means to them," said Julia Vanatta, a Wild Ones member and co-chair of this year's Design With Nature conference. "Do we stick with the rules, which is using a plant from a seed source within 100 miles that is adapted to the climate? Or do we want to relocate threatened species to save them?
Experts will discuss birds, bees and strategies for dealing with global temperature changes and the native plants in your back yard.
Jessica Hellmann, a biology professor at the University of Notre Dame, will give the keynote speech on how climate change is influencing every species on Earth and the challenges ahead.
Other topics include "Uncommon Facts About Common Birds," by naturalist and wildlife photographer Stan Tekiela, and how to design easily managed native landscapes by natural landscape expert Larry Weaner.
The conference will be held from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Feb. 25 at Plymouth Creek Center, 14800 34th Av., Plymouth. Cost is $60 and includes morning snack, lunch and dessert. Discounted admission, for those who register by Feb. 10, is $50 for members, $55 for nonmembers, $25 for students. To register, go to www.designwithnature conference.org or call 612-293-3833.
LYNN UNDERWOOD

Load-Date: February 8, 2012


End of Documen
t



WARM FRONT: Confronting a changing climate
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 28, 2019 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1663 words
Byline: GREG STANLEY; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: THE RACE TO SAVE COLD-WATER FISH // As lakes warm, scientists hope to nurture refuge waters for tiny cisco, a key food for game fish


Body


Third in a series
ITASCA STATE PARK - From a boat anchored near the center of Elk Lake, deep among the towering white pines of Itasca State Park, researcher Will French lowered a sensor into the water. A pair of loons howled and kept their distance as French called out the readings of oxygen levels and water temperatures, meter by meter, from the water's surface to the bottom of the lake more than 90 feet below.
Just 30 feet beneath the surface, French said oxygen levels were already too low for most fish to survive.
That's ominous for this early in the summer, and an especially bad sign for cold-water fish because temperatures closer to the surface are too high, leaving a roughly 10-foot band of cool, oxygen-rich water these species depend on.
That band will narrow throughout the summer as the lake heats and algae uses up the available oxygen, pinching cold-water fish into a smaller and smaller space.
"They're getting squeezed," said French, sentinel lakes biologist for the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
By the end of August, the livable area for those fish in Elk Lake could be reduced to less than a meter in depth, some 2 feet or so, said Beth Holbrook, research scientist for the DNR. If that happens, Holbrook and French expect to see some fish kills
and more strain on cold-water species that have been increasingly stressed in Minnesota for the past three decades.
So now the race is on. The DNR is using the data collected by French, Holbrook and their sentinel lake program to protect dozens of deep, cool Minnesota lakes that will stay cold enough and clean enough for key fish species to survive as the state's climate grows warmer.
Their target: a small, ghostly and sensitive fish called a cisco.
The fish, also known as tullibee, play a key role in Minnesota's aquatic food chain, as a main source of prey for some of the state's most prized game fish, including walleye, muskie and northern pike.
But cisco are also considered the canaries in the coal mine - the best indicators of a lake's health - because of their sensitivity to water clarity, temperatures and oxygen levels, said Peter Jacobson, DNR research supervisor.
"When we do have cisco we know we have better walleye and muskie populations that grow to a larger size," Jacobson said.
The collapse of the Midwest's cisco population is one of the many invisible but consequential ways that a warming climate is changing Minnesota. From songbirds along the Mississippi River to the green canopy of the northern forest, a landscape that Minnesotans have long taken for granted is increasingly under threat from rising temperatures and extreme weather events.
Across the Upper Midwest, cisco have been decimated by rising water temperatures. They've disappeared from more than a dozen Minnesota lakes and have lost more than half their total population over the last 30 years.
They've nearly vanished from Indiana, historically the southern edge of their natural range, and have disappeared from nearly a third of their native lakes in Wisconsin.
While cisco were once found in about 650 Minnesota lakes, the DNR and University of Minnesota scientists believe that just 176 of those are deep enough and clear enough for cisco to survive as temperatures continue to rise. These "refuge lakes," if the DNR can protect them, will be the last stand for the species in Minnesota.
Cisco start dying off when a lake's water temperature reaches the mid-70s. They survive Midwestern summers by retreating to the coldest, deepest parts of a lake. But they also need oxygen-rich water, and deep water generally has less oxygen.
Compounding the challenge, oxygen in many lakes is being sucked out by increasing amounts of algae, caused by both warmer temperatures and increased runoff of fertilizers and other nutrients from farms and urban development. When the algae dies, it sinks to the lake bed and decomposes, burning through the oxygen at the bottom of the lake.
Which leaves the cisco sandwiched between the low-oxygen dead zone near the lake's bottom and the warm water at the surface.
Eventually, they simply run out of space, said John Lyons, a longtime researcher with the Wisconsin DNR who is now with the University of Wisconsin.
"A lot depends on how long they're trapped down there," Lyons said. "If you have a long summer, they're down there longer and there's more time for that finite amount of oxygen to be used up."
Statewide, annual average temperatures have increased by about 3 degrees since the 1950s, according to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. Lakes across the state are losing up to four days of ice every 10 years, according to the State Climatology Office.
While cisco are typically among the first lake fish to die off as temperatures increase, they're not the only species at risk. Freshwater fish are divided into three categories: cold, cool and warm - the general temperature ranges at which fish species swim their fastest, find the most food and have the most success spawning.
While warm temperatures can kill cold-water fish like cisco, they also put tougher cool-water species such as walleye at major disadvantages, Lyons said.
In southern Wisconsin and Minnesota, largemouth bass are starting to reproduce more than walleye, essentially taking over lakes.
"A degree or two can really shift things inside a lake," Lyons said. "It's the difference between who is doing well and who is struggling."
The saving grace for the cisco is that Minnesota has a lot of deep water. But protecting those lakes means ensuring that they will keep enough oxygen.
That, in turn, depends on reducing the supply of nutrients and runoff that are reaching some lakes. Hence the DNR's effort to identify and protect sanctuary lakes.
One challenge is that many of the refuge lakes on the DNR's list lie in the center of the state, where the population has been increasing for years - along with more lake cabins, housing subdivisions and retail development.
State officials, conservation groups and lake associations are racing to buy up development rights within watersheds of refuge lakes to keep them wild.
The magic number seems to be 75%, Jacobson said. If the DNR and its partners can keep three-quarters of a deep lake's watershed forested and undeveloped, the water will likely stay clean enough for cisco to survive the summer, he said.
Minnesota lawmakers have set aside millions of dollars over the past several years to buy development rights near the center of the state - where the lakes are most at risk.
The project is starting to show progress. Groups have just about locked down 75% in places like LaSalle Lake near Bemidji and Ten Mile Lake in Otter Tail County.
But even with intervention, hundreds of lakes are still likely to lose their cisco if temperatures keep climbing, potentially including highly popular lakes such as Mille Lacs.
Even those marginal cisco lakes with almost completely protected watersheds, such as Elk Lake in Itasca State Park, might lose their cisco as the fish are pinched into an ever-narrowing band between warm water and oxygen-deprived zones.
"The best we can hope for is that some of these really good lakes will be able to hold their own," Jacobson said.
John Magnuson, a retired professor of limnology at the University of Wisconsin, said the Midwest has begun to take a triage mentality for cold-water fish - don't try to save lakes that are as good as gone, but focus efforts on those that can survive.
"Think of this [as] doctors would after a bus crash, when they know they can't save everybody," Magnuson said.
Aside from the changes to the ecosystem, it's hard to quantify exactly what a lake and its people lose when cisco are gone, Magnuson said.
He remembers when Lake Mendota in Madison had enough cisco to support commercial fisheries.
When those disappeared, cisco were still plentiful enough that people were drawn to the lake's rocky shores in the fall - just before the water started to freeze and the fish were spawning in sufficient numbers that they could be caught with hand nets.
"They'd scoop them out and take them home to smoke them," Magnuson said.
Now cisco are all but extinct in Lake Mendota.
"They're just gone," Magnuson said, "and except for one or two in our nets, you'll never see them here."
Greg Stanley · 612-673-4882
DEEP LAKES
Minnesota scientists have identified 176 deep-water lakes that they think will stay cold enough and clean enough to sustain important fish species as the state's waters grow warmer and more polluted with climate change. In particular, the Department of Natural Resources is trying to build refuges for cisco, a cold-water fish that is a key food source for walleye, muskie and pike.
Key levels of a deep lake and how it responds to heat and oxygen
1. The sun-warmed surface layer is often home to bass, bluegill and pike. But algae also forms here, and as temperatures rise, dying algae falls to the bottom of the lake, where it decomposes and consumes oxygen.
2. The second layer is colder, but still has enough oxygen for fish to survive. This layer is often home to cold-water fish like cisco and walleye, but this zone grows thinner as the lake's upper layer gets warmer.
3. The lowest layer is the coldest and often lacks enough oxygen for fish to survive. As dead plant matter collects on the lake bottom it consumes more oxygen, which can compress the lake's middle even more.
Sources: University of Minnesota, MnDNR
PROTECTING DEEP, COLD LAKES
As climate change causes Minnesota lakes to grow warmer, DNR scientists have identified dozens of cool, deep lakes where cold-water fish such as walleye and lake trout can survive in coming decades.
Refuge lakes 176 lakes have been identified.
(See the page PDF or microfilm for the complete map/chart.)
Source: Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
About this series: "Warm Front" is a Star Tribune occasional series examining the ways that climate change is altering Minnesota and the lives of its residents. Read more at startribune.com.

Load-Date: July 31, 2019


End of Documen
t



McKnight fights climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
April 8, 2013 Monday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2013 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 549 words
Byline: BILL MCAULIFFE; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Grants totaling $25 million, focused on the Midwest, will put money behind efforts to expand clean energy policies and jobs


Body


The McKnight Foundation is putting a $25 million Midwest focus on its efforts to combat climate change.
Two grants from the philanthropy's new Midwest Climate & Energy program will aim to support strategies that reduce greenhouse gas emissions through the use of renewable energy and increased energy efficiencies in agriculture and transportation.
The two-year grants of $20 million to Energy Foundation and $5 million to RE-AMP, a network of nonprofits, extend existing funding partnerships and the philanthropy's $100 million commitment, announced in 2008, to blunt climate change. The two groups will focus on developing policies and public education to reduce dependence on fossil fuels in Minnesota, the Dakotas, Wisconsin, Illinois, Iowa, Michigan and Ohio.
Noting that Midwesterners contribute 22 percent more greenhouse gases per capita than other Americans because of the region's heavy reliance on coal for electricity, McKnight board chairman Ted Staryk said that also means the Midwest is "uniquely well-positioned to turn the dial the other direction."
President Kate Wolford added, "As the region experiences the impacts of more and more 'once in a century' floods and other weather events, we see a growing demand across local businesses, government, and communities to incorporate climate mitigation and adaptation measures into decisionmaking."
The funding could help enhance economic opportunities in renewable energies and new, clean technologies, said Eric Heitz, president of the San Francisco-based Energy Foundation, which has received McKnight grants since 1993.
"Minnesota has good wind resources, but unless you create policies for getting them on the road to market, you won't be able to bring them to people," Heitz added. Filling such gaps is "enabling innovation and competition," he said.
Michael Noble, executive director of the Twin Cities-based Fresh Energy, a clean-energy economy advocacy group, who is also chairman of RE-AMP's clean energy working group, said the Midwest is "way, way down in the hole," relying on aging coal-burning power plants. But policies such as Minnesota's renewable energy standard, which sets graduating goals over time for the amount of energy generated by renewables, can actually help the region take the lead into clean energies. McKnight's grants would support development of such policies, he said.
"The Midwest is historically the industrial heartland. Also the agricultural heartland. Also the most carbon-dependent part of the country," Noble said. "But we also have vast renewable energy resources. The wind energy is phenomenal. We have the best, cheapest solutions. And we're also the part of the country that is the middle of the country politically. I think people believe that as goes the Midwest, so goes the nation on energy and climate policy. If they can do it in [the Midwest], that will set the bar for America."
The McKnight Foundation was established in 1953 by William L. McKnight, who rose to become president and CEO of 3M in a 59-year career there, and his wife, Maude L. McKnight. Its funding strategies have changed through the years and now include regional economic and community development, the arts, the environment, neuroscience, international crop research and early literacy.
Bill McAuliffe · 612-673-7646

Load-Date: April 10, 2013


End of Documen
t



Climate crisis takes the back burner
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
April 2, 2020 Thursday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2020 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 1094 words
Byline: JENNIFER BJORHUS; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: CORONAVIRUS: Advocates hope global resolve over the pandemic is a model for climate action.


Body


The nation's $2 trillion coronavirus rescue package throws a lifeline to small businesses, the unemployed, airlines, hospitals, student loan debtors and even the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.
It contains almost nothing environmentalists have pushed for, and it certainly does not put the country on the sort of carbon crash diet that climate scientists and activists say is necessary to head off the worst effects of a changing climate.
For now, that's appropriate, many climate advocates say.
The warming of the earth's atmosphere, one of the other threats facing humanity, has been put on the back burner as societies race to save lives in the COVID-19 pandemic. The economic shutdown slashed China's greenhouse gas emissions and will surely cut them in Minnesota and the rest of the United States, but it's a temporary side effect of a sudden economic shutdown that has nothing to do with addressing global warming.
Eager to keep the climate crisis from being forgotten, environmentalists have put forth a flood of commentary, tweets, blogs and podcasts in recent weeks discussing parallels between the pandemic and climate change, and critical differences. "Covid 19 is climate change on warp speed," tweeted NYU climate economist Gernot Wagner, author of "Climate Shock."
A common theme is the desire for the health emergency to sound a wake-up call for climate action. But there's a consensus that the time for that is after the health crisis passes, as Congress moves from emergency relief to stimulating the nation's economic recovery.
"Americans are in emergency mode now. We're focused on how to get groceries and how to take care of children who need nutrition," said Michael Noble, executive director of the St. Paul-based clean energy policy group Fresh Energy. "It's not right this minute."
"But over the next year or 18 months, as we try to figure out how to get back on our feet ... this is a hell of an opportunity to look at: 'What does a world look like that doesn't run on fossil fuel?' "
Rolf Nordstrom, who heads the Minneapolis-based Great Plains Institute, agreed.
"First things first, let's help one another through this current crisis," said Nordstrom. "Wouldn't it be great if we can repurpose this global resolve to become better stewards of the one home we all share?"
For most ordinary Minnesotans with upended lives, carbon emissions are not top of mind at the moment, although many have noted their shrunken carbon footprint.
Maria Surma Manka, who lives in rural Morrison County with her husband and two sons, said she has been focused on the logistics of their new routines. Still, questions have percolated, and in a conversation with a friend she said they mused: "Will people go back to their frenzied lives after this? Will they still sign up their kids for every activity?"
"It has climate implications," said Manka, "if you're not driving a million times a day."
"Maybe people will decide that a slower pace is better."
Throttling back individual consumption is important, climate activists say. But behavior is a small piece of the huge systematic change needed in how the country's energy is produced, distributed and used, said Dan Lashof, U.S. director of the World Resources Institute, based in Washington, D.C. Lashof and many others are pleading with lawmakers to seize this opportunity to accelerate low-carbon investments, such as building out the infrastructure for electric vehicles and long-distance, high-voltage transmission lines necessary to transport wind and solar energy to high-demand areas.
In an open letter to members of Congress sent March 22, dozens of climate scientists and activists outlined how upcoming stimulus packages could speed up decarbonization. Options range from expanding the federal Weatherization Assistance Program to cut utility costs and carbon emissions from homes, to ending fossil fuel subsidies and phasing out oil and gas drilling.
"This is an inflection point for our nation," the letter reads. "This is a pivotal moment to put tens of millions of Americans back to work, building a healthy, clean, and just future."
Co-author Mark Paul, who teaches economics and environmental studies at New College of Florida in Sarasota, said the crash decarbonization program is for the next wave of stimulus, when the pandemic is under control and people can safely return to work. Planning needs to start now, he said, for projects to be shovel-ready.
"I think we're talking weeks, or at most months, in terms of passing an additional stimulus plan that will hopefully have green infrastructure," he said.
NYU's Wagner, who signed the letter, said he has no idea if weeks or months is realistic. There are too many unknowns in the current health crisis, he said: "Things are certainly going to get a lot worse, exponentially, before they get better."
Low-carbon stimulus isn't likely to find broad support in the current Republican-led Senate, where Republicans have been hostile to climate-change legislation. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell lashed out at Democrats for trying to get provisions such as tax deductions for solar and wind energy and new emissions standards for airlines into the $2 trillion coronavirus rescue package, saying on the Senate floor: "Are you kidding me?"
The administration's hallmark regulatory rollback has continued unabated. Last week the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency announced it was temporarily suspending enforcement of civil violations of the monitoring, testing and reporting regulated facilities must do. And on Tuesday the administration issued a final rule that significantly weakens Obama-era vehicle fuel economy standards.
A key takeaway for climate advocates from the unfolding COVID-19 response, climate advocates say, is the urgent importance of a coordinated, rapid response.
"The more we do to mitigate, the more we do to reduce risk, and the more we do to address the problem before it's truly out of control, the less the suffering will be," Noble said. "That's the almost direct parallel."
The pandemic also proves that the world can actually move quickly in the face of a global nonpolitical threat to human life. That's a hopeful note for environmentalists accustomed to hearing that countering climate change is too expensive, too difficult or involves too much sacrifice, said Jessica Hellmann, director of the Institute on the Environment at the University of Minnesota.
"This pandemic response shows us that society is willing to do remarkable things when it decides to," Hellmann said.
Jennifer Bjorhus · 612-673-4683

Load-Date: April 2, 2020


End of Documen
t



Health officials address global warming; The state will share in a federal grant to study the health effects of climate change in Minnesota.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 13, 2010 Wednesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2010 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 5B
Length: 344 words
Byline: MAURA LERNER; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


People joke that Minnesota would welcome global warming.
But beyond the obvious doomsday predictions, officials say that climate change could affect residents' health in unexpected ways. On Tuesday, Minnesota won a federal grant, along with seven other states and two cities, to prepare themselves.
What's new?
The Minnesota Department of Health will receive $238,000 a year, for three years, as part of a $5.25 million grant from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The Minnesota project will focus on the seven-county metro area.
What are the health risks in Minnesota?
Climate change could result in more deadly heat waves, and increase the risk of diseases spread by insects and flooding, according to federal and state projections. Among other things, it could affect where and when ticks spread Lyme disease. Globally, diseases like malaria -- typically confined to warm areas -- could spread to new areas. Changes in air quality could exacerbate asthma and chronic lung disease.
What can Minnesota do to defend itself?
One practical step is to ensure that there's help for vulnerable people, such as the elderly, during heat waves, says Dan Symonik, environmental health supervisor at the health department. That could include creating "cooling centers" where people without air conditioning can find refuge. "Our population and our housing is kind of vulnerable to extreme heat," he said. "We kind of build our houses to stay warm, not to stay cool."
What about Lyme disease?
Climate change could be good news -- or bad -- for Minnesotans when it comes to Lyme disease. It could extend the season or make it more difficult for ticks to thrive here, depending on how things unfold, Symonik says. It could change where ticks thrive, and thus where people are most at risk. "The message is, it's probably going to be changing," he said. "Some of the things you thought you knew may not work anymore."
What's next?
State health officials will work with local public health agencies and city planners to shape contingency plans.
Maura Lerner - 612-673-7384

Load-Date: October 15, 2010


End of Documen
t



Panel looks to put climate change in rear-view mirror; A group assembled by Gov. Tim Pawlenty is strategizing how to cut greenhouse emissions by getting Minnesotans to drive less.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 15, 2007 Monday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 808 words
Byline: Bill McAuliffe, Staff Writer
Body


For the sake of the planet, kids born this year could be the first generation of Minnesotans since the invention of the automobile to drive less than their parents.
In fact, they would drive a lot less, and so would everybody else, as part of a broad transformation of behaviors, policies and economies that a governor's panel is weighing in an effort to blunt Minnesota's contribution to climate change.
"The question is, `Can we get there and what's it going to take?'-" said Jan Callison, mayor of Minnetonka and a member of the Minnesota Climate Change Advisory Group. A reduction in driving is "one piece of a really big and complicated puzzle," Callison added, "but one conclusion is probably that we're going to need to change our driving habits."
The advisory group is a panel of more than 50 business, environmental and community leaders assembled by Gov. Tim Pawlenty to design strategies to reduce the state's greenhouse gas emissions - primarily carbon dioxide - by 80 percent by 2050. The group is more than halfway through nine months of brainstorming intended to produce a package of proposals for the 2008 Legislature to consider.
Because transportation contributes about 27 percent of the carbon dioxide poured into Minnesota's atmosphere, one of the panel's goals - a rollback in miles driven in Minnesota to 1990 levels by 2025 - could significantly reduce or even help reverse pollution trends.
Minnesotans are expected to drive 60 billion miles this year and 82 billion in 2025 if generations-long trends continue. They drove 38.9 billion in 1990 - 35 percent less than they'll drive this year and less than half what they would otherwise be expected to drive in 2025.
`Incredibly aggressive' goal
The mileage-reduction goal is for a period when the metro area alone is expected to gain nearly 1 million residents. It mirrors a standard already adopted by a similar governor's panel in Vermont but exceeds those in several other states. Callison called it "incredibly aggressive."
But Callison and Barb Thoman, project director for the group Transit for Livable Communities and, like Callison, a member of a transportation subgroup of the governor's panel, both noted that the goal depends on much more than just setting the parking brake. It would build on broad strategies designed in part to get people to drive less: locating jobs and people close to one another, redeveloping core cities and expanding mass transit.
Rising gas prices might also help Minnesotans cut back on their driving, Thoman said, noting that Minnesota's vehicle miles traveled in 2005 nearly matched those from 2004 after decades of sharp increases.
"It promises substantial change in the way we develop our communities," Callison said. "It's going to take a lot of thought and attention to implications beyond greenhouse gas reductions."
Paying to drive?
The transportation panel is also recommending having people pay directly for road use, parking and other transportation features whose costs are now concealed by public subsidies.
That, along with land-use changes and transit options, is critical, said University of Minnesota geography Prof. John Adams, who is involved in a parallel study on transportation and greenhouse gases. But will Minnesotans stomach driving less or paying more for the privilege?
"That's where leadership comes in," Adams said.
Some suggestions from the advisory panel may not require legislation and could be enacted by state agencies, said David Thornton, assistant commissioner of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
Almost certain to emerge from the process is a "cap and trade" policy that, in tandem with limits on greenhouse gas pollution, would allow big producers of carbon dioxide, such as utilities, to buy and sell carbon credits.
But that's only one of more than 50 emissions-reductions proposals involving energy, waste management, agriculture, construction and other activities the panel is considering. Consultants are determining both the cost and the emissions reductions each idea represents.
Bill McAuliffe - 612-673-7646more online
MINNESOTA'S DRIVING MILEAGE: AN UPWARD TREND
The number of vehicle miles traveled (VMT) on Minnesota roads has increased steadily for many years, nearly doubling since 1983.
Total annual VMT, in billions
1983: 30.30
2006: 56.59
(1982-2005: See microfilm for chart.)
Note: Some values prior to 1992 were estimated.
Source: Minnesota Department of Transportation
MORE ONLINE
For ideas under consideration by individual subject groups, go to:
- Agriculture, forestry and waste:   startribune.com/a3475
- Energy supply:   startribune.com/a3476
- Residential, commercial and industrial:  startribune.com/a3477
- Transportation and  land use:  startribune.com/a3478
- Cross-cutting issues:  startribune.com/a3479
For more details on the Minnesota Climate Change Advisory Panel, go to mnclimatechange.us.

Notes

See microfilm for complete chart.


Graphic

 
CHART

Load-Date: October 18, 2007


End of Documen
t



A mesmerizing look at motherhood, climate change and menace
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
May 27, 2018 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2018 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: VARIETY; Pg. 9E
Length: 475 words
Byline: JACKIE THOMAS-KENNEDY, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: FICTION: Lauren Groff's latest collection of stories offers adventure, escape and folly.


Body


Special to the Star Tribune
"Florida," Lauren Groff's fifth book - and second collection of short stories - is filled with the mesmerizing, decadent language one finds in all of her work.
Although a few of the stories follow Floridians abroad (in Brazil and in France), the titular state looms as a setting of lush beauty and swift menace: snakes and hurricanes, ghosts and sinkholes, panthers and St. Augustine grass.
"Florida in the summer is a slow hot drowning," reports the narrator of "Yport."
Climate change is a spectral source of fear in these pages; violent storms seem to move from one story to the next. Among the splendor of the imagery, Groff scatters frequent harbingers.
This collection opens with "Ghosts and Empties," in which a mother takes a ritual walk through her Northern Florida neighborhood every evening while her husband gets their children ready for bed. "I do not want to be a woman who yells," she explains. She lives in an "imperfectly safe" area, "frenzied with renovation," and the "ghosts and empties" of the title seem, at first glance, to refer to the old housing stock. The subtext becomes quite visible when the narrator, a casual voyeur, observes "the mothers I know in glimpses, bent like shepherdess crooks, scanning the floor for tiny Legos or half-chewed grapes or the people they once were, slumped in the corners." In this collection, the transformative aspect of motherhood is one of Groff's concerns.
Occasionally, this makes some of the characters' voices hard to distinguish. The writer in "Yport," who takes her sons to France while she researches Guy de Maupassant, sounds very much like the mother in "Flower Hunters," who "buries all her failures in reading."
In "The Midnight Zone," one of this collection's finest pieces, the narrator tells us, "all that interested me was my books and my children." Such "interest" comes with its own set of rules: "All that seemed assigned by default of gender I would not do because it felt insulting. I would not buy clothes, I would not make dinner, I would not keep schedules, I would not make playdates, never ever. Motherhood meant, for me, that I would take the boys on ... adventures." Adventure and escape, whether it be through books or through travel, are crucial to many of Groff's characters.
Yet adventures are not without folly; in fact, in "The Midnight Zone" and in "Yport," in "Salvador" and in "Dogs Go Wolf," they are fraught with failure. Groff's storytelling has such ferocious energy, and is so attuned to the natural world, that even a seemingly peaceful setting is only moments away from havoc.
Jackie Thomas-Kennedy's writing has appeared in Lenny Letter, Narrative, Crazyhorse, the Millions, Harvard Review and elsewhere. She held a 2014-2016 Stegner Fellowship at Stanford University.
Florida
By: Lauren Groff.
Publisher: Riverhead, 275 pages, $27.

Load-Date: May 29, 2018


End of Documen
t



'Most important step' vs. climate change unveiled
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
August 4, 2015 Tuesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2015 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D
Length: 1201 words
Byline: DAVID SHAFFER; JIM SPENCER; STAFF WRITERS, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: New EPA rules dictate less coal burning and more clean energy, efficiency


Body


WASHINGTON - The Obama administration issued landmark rules Monday to cut greenhouse gases from coal-burning power plants, mapping out a 15-year path to increase wind and solar power, and energy conservation that Minnesota already is taking.
The final Environmental Protection Agency rules require the U.S. power sector to cut carbon dioxide emissions by 32 percent in 2030 from 2005 levels. The overall reductions are stricter than those proposed in a draft last year, but states and utilities got more time to comply.
"This is one of those rare issues that if we don't get it right, we might not be able to reverse it," President Obama told a White House crowd that included Sen. Al Franken, D-Minn., and Xcel Energy CEO Ben Fowke.
The Clean Power Plan, Obama said, is "the single most important step America has ever taken in the fight against climate change."
Franken agreed. "I thought it was a bit of history," he told the Star Tribune.
The rules are the product of two years of EPA development and likely face years of legal challenges. States are required to develop compliance plans by September 2018, make interim reductions by 2022 - two years later than originally proposed - and fully comply by 2030.
States may choose to roll out an array of policies that could shutter coal power plants or run them less, order
utilities to build wind farms and solar energy and invest in energy conservation at homes and businesses. The final rule puts less emphasis on converting or replacing generators with natural-gas burning units, which release about half the carbon dioxide of coal burners.
Compliance is not optional. States that refuse to offer acceptable programs will have a federal model applied to them, EPA officials said.
Minnesota, which has long mandated utilities make investments in efficiency and renewable energy, is better positioned than some states to comply with the Clean Power Plan. In the final version, the EPA recognized the state's early efforts at carbon reduction and reduced the 2030 carbon reduction target from 42 percent to 40.3 percent, said J. Drake Hamilton, science policy director for the St. Paul nonprofit Fresh Energy, which supported the plan.
"Minnesota will have a much smoother glidepath," Hamilton said.
Over the past five years, Minnesota utilities have decided to retire or convert 14 coal-fired generating units to natural gas. Minnesota gets more than 15 percent of its electricity from wind and has long required utilities to invest in energy efficiency programs. Even so, 55 percent of the state's power still comes from coal.
"We are probably more than halfway there already," David Thornton, assistant commissioner for air policy at the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, said of the state's ability to comply with the Clean Power Plan.
Thornton said his agency will need several days to review the 1,560 pages of regulations, but he said the early indications are that EPA officials made the rules "a lot more equitable" among states.
Mike Bull, director of policy and communications for the nonprofit Center for Energy and Environment in Minneapolis, said energy efficiency is moving beyond lighting, heating and cooling systems. "Smart building services," which include technology to anticipate when buildings need extra cooling, for example, "will be where the largest reductions come in the future," he said.
Xcel Energy, the state's largest utility with 1.2 million electric customers, recently told state regulators it plans to add 600 megawatts, or three to four wind farms, by 2020. Yet Xcel wants to keep running until 2030, but at reduced levels, its two large 1970s-era coal generators at its Sherco power plant in Becker, the largest carbon emitter in the state.
In a statement, Fowke noted Xcel has been the nation's leading wind power utility for 11 years straight, part of a corporate policy to increase renewable energy and to modernize or retire coal power plants. "While we expect the Clean Power Plan does not provide everything we hoped for in terms of fully recognizing the early actions of proactive states and utilities, Xcel Energy is ready to move ahead," he said.
At Great River Energy, the state's second largest power company serving 650,000 Minnesota customers in 28 local cooperatives, officials are reviewing the rules' effect on North Dakota, where the cooperative power company owns three coal-burning power plants that are its main sources of electricity.
"It's time to regulate CO2 emissions from power plants - it is definitely time," said Eric Olsen, vice president and general counsel for Great River. "This rule may not be the best rule, but we've already been sitting down with Minnesota and North Dakota officials to talk."
In Washington, the national emissions standards have been a simmering source of controversy and business lobbying for well over a year.
The power industry and its allies said the rule will bring economic harm and cost jobs.
The National Rural Electric Cooperative Association, whose members rely heavily on coal-based electricity, said its study projected a 10 percent hike in the price of electricity with the loss of 1.2 million jobs by 2021.
Consumer Energy Alliance President David Holt, whose coalition represents dozens of trade groups and businesses, said "the White House failed to give significant consideration to the impacts to energy consumers."
Senate and House members from Minnesota split along party lines in reacting to the announcement.
Franken, a Democrat, called Minnesota's carbon-cutting requirements "very achievable."
In a statement, Democratic Sen. Amy Klobuchar said she was reviewing the new rules "to determine how they will apply in Minnesota, including the issues of credit for our state's early action and energy generation across state lines."
Democratic Rep. Tim Walz also promised to study the proposal to make sure it worked and wasn't burdensome.
Democratic Rep. Keith Ellison of Minneapolis, co-chair of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, said in a joint statement with Rep. Raúl M. Grijalva, D-Ariz., that the country needs to "undo harmful effects [of carbon] that have gone unchecked."
Democratic Rep. Betty McCollum likened the president's plan to what Minnesota has been doing for years.
But Republican Reps. John Kline and Tom Emmer see trouble in Obama's approach.
Kline said it "would cause energy bills to skyrocket for Minnesotans and all Americans who are feeling the effects of an already overburdened economy."
Emmer complained that the plan did not give Minnesota enough credit for earlier pollution control efforts.
"Not only is this plan patently unfair to Minnesotans, but it will have devastating impacts across the nation while providing little environmental benefit," he said.
David Shaffer · 612-673-7090 Jim Spencer · 202-383-6123
Clean Power Plan
Key dates
State plans due:
September 2018*
Initial reduction:
2022
Full compliance:
2030
How to get there
· Reduce coal burning or retire power plants.
· Increase carbon-free energy from wind and solar.
· Cut energy use through utility efficiency programs.
· Allow trading of carbon credits with other states.
· If states don't form plans, EPA will impose limits.
* Including two-year extension
SEE MICROFILM OR PDF FOR CHART.

Load-Date: August 4, 2015


End of Documen
t



Can we bury CO2 in North Dakota prairie?; An ambitious project aims to fight climate change and free up underground oil.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
November 4, 2007 Sunday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 985 words
Byline: Bill McAuliffe, Staff Writer
Body


Not long ago, the North Dakota prairie hid missiles that were key weapons during the Cold War. Now, it's a proving ground for a new high-tech attack on global warming.
A partnership that includes Minnesota corporations and state agencies is testing whether it can pump carbon dioxide - the key pollutant linked to climate change - deep into the ground. That would not only remove it from the atmosphere, but also free up inaccessible oil and gas deposits.
Winning crucial federal money last month, the "Plains CO2 Reduction Partnership" is part of a nearly $300 million program underway in three regions of North America.
Together they constitute the largest experiment in the world to capture carbon dioxide produced by power plants and other major sources and seal it away underground, perhaps for thousands of years.
"The primary goal of the whole project is to find a way to put the CO2 in a place where the cork's in the bottle," said Gerry Groenewold, director of the Energy and Environment Research Center at the University of North Dakota.
Meanwhile, researchers in Minnesota, backed by nearly $500,000 approved by the Legislature this year, have determined that limited underground carbon dioxide storage may be possible here. But more promising is the prospect of "storing" carbon in stems, trunks and leaves by planting more trees, grasses and cover crops and restoring wetlands.
"The state is increasingly focusing on an environmental agenda, and a climate-change agenda, and we need to consider all options, all possibilities," said state geologist Harvey Thorleifson.
Making it pay
The Plains CO2 Reduction Partnership is launching one test that will inject 1 million tons of CO2 annually into a remnant of an ancient sea about 10,000 feet below the North Dakota prairie.
Carbon dioxide from a coal-fired power plant near Beulah, N.D., will be compressed into a fluid and pumped into the earth where it will remain, said associate research director John Harju, "in perpetuity." (For comparison, Minnesotans produce about 115 million tons of carbon dioxide every year.)
But the test doesn't end with storage. The carbon dioxide also will be used to recover oil out of deep rock formations. A smaller test is about to inject carbon dioxide gas into a 1,000-foot-deep seam of inaccessible coal in northwest North Dakota, where it may force trapped methane to the surface for use in home heating and electricity generation.
But doesn't taking carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere and using it to produce more fossil fuels only reinforce the global-warming cycle?
"That's oil we were going to go get anyway," said Bill Grant, a member of a Minnesota panel drawing up climate-change strategies to bring to the Legislature in February.
The overall process, Grant emphasized, can help slow or reverse carbon dioxide emissions. Plus, the economic potential can broaden the political support for anti-global warming measures.
"Unless you can persuade coal-state senators that there's a path forward for coal in a carbon-constrained world, they're going to be very hard to move on the question of how steeply we should regulate carbon emissions," Grant said.
"There's no magic bullet laying around," Harju said.
Race against time
In Minnesota, burying CO2 underground might be possible only on the edges of a narrow geologic rift that meanders from Lake Superior southwest through eastern Minnesota and central Iowa into eastern Nebraska and Kansas. A more likely alternative, Thorleifson said, might be a process of combining carbon dioxide with minerals to create rocks that could be used in construction. "It's all a question of costs," he said.
Instead, what's now turning heads in Minnesota is the so-called "terrestrial sequestration" in plants, wetlands and soils. It wouldn't be as long-lasting as the geologic version but could play several roles, said Rep. Kent Eken, DFL-Twin Valley, who sponsored a bill authorizing $475,000 to study terrestrial sequestration and $90,000 for geological sequestration.
Carbon storage in the landscape, which would in large part require a return of cropland into grasslands and wetlands and deforested lands back into forest, would have its own environmental benefits, Eken said. But it could also have strong economic value if and when policy-makers attach a price to carbon emissions; then carbon-holding lands could be bought and traded or used as credits by big CO2 emitters.
At the same time, crops such as grasses might be harvested and used for energy while their roots remain to hold carbon in the soil. Studies have shown that up to 60 percent of the carbon-holding material in the soils of the Great Plains has been lost to plowing.
Indeed, researchers agree that carbon storage, while helping meet carbon dioxide emissions reduction goals, is also a way to buy time - time for low-carbon alternatives to fossil fuels to emerge in a significant way. Fossil fuels now account for about 85 percent of the world's energy sources, Harju said. Finding a storage place for carbon will have to happen faster, Grant noted.
"Climate scientists say we need to achieve 70 to 80 percent reduction in CO2 release into the atmosphere by, say, the middle of the century," Grant noted. "That's an extremely ambitious time frame."
Bill McAuliffe - 612-673-7646
TO LEARN MORE
For more information on the Plains CO2 Reduction Partnership, go to www. eerc.und.nodak.edu/pcor.  For more information about Minnesota's carbon sequestration efforts, go to http:;wrc.umn.edu/outreach/carbon.
CARBON CAPTURE OPTIONS
BIOLOGICAL
1. Plants absorb carbon from carbon dioxide during photosynthesis and expel oxygen.
2. Carbon captured at power plants and cleaned of contaminants could be used as soil amendment.
GEOLOGICAL
3. Carbon captured at power plants and cleaned of contaminants could be injected into deep geological formations.
(See microfilm for complete illustration)
Diagram is schematic
Star Tribune graphic

Graphic

 
ILLUSTRATION

Load-Date: November 9, 2007


End of Documen
t



Summit on climate change set for Mpls.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 23, 2014 Tuesday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2014 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3B
Length: 382 words
Byline: MAURA LERNER; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Conference to attract former world leaders, others next year to forge "templates" for action.


Body


Dozens of former world leaders are expected to converge on Minneapolis in October 2015 for an international summit on climate change and democracy, organizers announced Monday.
The conference, called "Minnesota 2015: Democracy for a Sustainable Future," is designed to draw people from around the globe to explore ways that democratic nations can reduce greenhouse emissions.
"It takes it beyond 'here's the challenge, here's the problem,' " said Orlyn Kringstad, executive director of the U.S. branch of Partnership for Change, one of the cosponsors. "It's [about] what needs to be done and how governments around the world can support those efforts."
The summit will be held in connection with the annual meeting of Club de Madrid, an organization of some 100 past presidents and prime ministers from around the globe, including former U.S. presidents Bill Clinton and Jimmy Carter. The University of Minnesota has offered to host some of the sessions.
"We're really calling it an event, because it's more than just a conference," said Kringstad.
Kringstad said that the former world leaders, who have joined forces on a host of global problems, will help focus attention on the challenges of climate change and sustainable development.
"They're not constrained by politics or policies or by political parties within their countries any longer," he said. "They're much more open to speak."
Minneapolis attorney Jim Dorsey, the conference director, said the goal is to "create a series of templates" showing how business, governments, groups and individuals can work together to reduce the carbon emissions that contribute to global warming.
Those strategies, he said, "will be known collectively as the Minnesota Compact."
He acknowledged that the politics around climate change and global warming have created a stalemate in the U.S. Congress. But he said there's also growing support for action, especially in the business world. "The dialogue is changing," he said.
Former Vice President Walter Mondale and Marilyn Carlson Nelson, the former chairwoman and CEO of Carlson Cos., will serve as honorary chairs, and President Eric Kaler of the University of Minnesota will serve as co-chairman.
The conference, dubbed MN2015, will be held in Minneapolis from Oct. 25 to 28, 2015.
Maura Lerner · 612-673-7384

Load-Date: September 23, 2014


End of Documen
t



Readers Write; LETTER OF THE DAY; Quiet summit suggests climate change low on national agenda
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
December 13, 2010 Monday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2010 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12A
Length: 154 words
Body


As an environmentally conscious college student, it is unfortunate to see another United Nations climate summit proceed without the prospect of any significant global legislation being enacted. This year's summit in Cancun lacks the sense of change that went along with last year's meeting in Copenhagen.
While the Mexican foreign secretary did declare that there would be transparency ("Climate summit's leaders vow 'no secret negotiations,'" Dec. 6), it still begs the question of who is actually negotiating on behalf of entire nations, and how vast is their knowledge of the issues from their home nations at the grass-roots level?
As a country that regards itself as a leader in the international community, the United States' low level of participation in this year's climate change summit seems to only affirm the notion that global climate change ranks relatively low on the national agenda.
BROOKS STAPLETON, St. Louis Park

Load-Date: December 14, 2010


End of Documen
t



THE CASE OF THE MISSING MINNESOTA MOOSE; Is it parasites, or climate change, or both, that's killing Minnesota's moose? Researchers are attacking the question on the ground, in the air, with radio, needle and microscope
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
February 24, 2008 Sunday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2008 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1659 words
Byline: Bill McAuliffe, Staff Writer
Dateline: Isabella, Minn 
Body


Moose 294 lay in deep snow in the scrubby woods, eyes half open in the bright February sun. Huffing steadily, her coat a shimmering walnut brown, she might have been enjoying a winter siesta, but for the pink-tufted tranquilizer dart lodged in her backside

For researchers Mark Keech and Tiffany Wolf, though, this was no time to relax. From the time Keech had fired the dart from a helicopter into the fleeing 850-pound moose, Keech and Wolf had about 30 minutes for a full work-up

Wolf, an associate veterinarian with the Minnesota Zoo, withdrew several tubes of blood. Keech, a research biologist, sliced out the barbed dart and yanked out an incisor. Wolf collected hair and fecal samples. Keech riveted an air tag through the moose's ear and screwed on a heavy leather collar equipped with a radio transmitter

Time was running out. Wolf injected two drugs to reverse the tranquilizers and the researchers scrambled off about 20 yards. As if on cue, Moose 294 gave a little groan, stumbled, rose grandly to her feet, collected her wits and clattered off through the brush

"Good luck!" Keech called out

Good luck indeed. Something strange is killing the moose of northern Minnesota, and wildlife scientists hope Moose 294 and others like it can provide some clues as to why. The task is urgent: In the course of a few years, the number of moose in northwestern Minnesota has plummeted to near extinction

What the researchers find out could shed light on broader changes in the North Woods, where the moose is an iconic part of the landscape and the web of life

"When you think of northern Minnesota, you think of the North Shore, the Boundary Waters, wolves, loons and moose," said Mike Schrage, wildlife biologist for the Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa, which is partnering with the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources and the 1854 Treaty Authority in studying the northeast moose herd. "They're part of our identity. You pick up a Duluth Pack, and what's the logo? A big bull moose."
Scientists say that the moose are dying from "tipover disease," less a diagnosis than a description of how moose simply weaken and crumple to the ground, often to be finished off by wolves or other predators. Minnesota moose seem to be dying when and where they shouldn't - in the prime of life, or in the fall, when they should be fat, and amid plenty of food. The causes are still largely unknown

It might be due to parasites they've picked up from an exploding deer population. It might be a complication of heat stress, induced by a climate that's gotten too warm too fast. It might be combination of those and other factors



850-pound canary?
The fate of the state's largest herbivore is about more than postcard imagery, Schrage and others say. The moose may be an outsized canary in a coal mine, representative of a struggle facing many other animals whose home ranges and climate are changing, said Dennis Murray, a professor of terrestrial ecology at Ontario's Trent University

"We don't know those other species as well as moose," Murray said. "Therefore those changes aren't as apparent."
Researchers have been studying the northeast moose since 2002. Of the 114 they've collared and tracked since then, only 28 were still standing this year. Of the other 86, more than half died of unknown causes

No moose were collared the past two years because there wasn't any money. Now a $200,000 federal Tribal Wildlife Grant will pay for research through the winter of 2010-11. The Minnesota Deer Hunters Association has also contributed

Researchers aren't wasting time. Their goal this year was to put collars on 35 moose, all cows, so they can focus on pregnancy rates

On Tuesday, months of planning turned into action. The study partners were joined at the Ely Municipal Airport by the zoo's Wolf, who handles the tranquilizers and anti- dotes, and two Alaskans in their fourth year on the job. Keech was "vacationing" from his regular job with the Alaska Department of Fish and Game, and helicopter pilot Scott Gibbens is a retired state trooper who's been tracking wildlife by air for 10 years. Ground support included a fuel truck and a pair of snowmobiles

It was just luck that the overnight temperature hit 24 below at Ely

"Hard on people and equipment, but good for the moose," Schrage said

DNR pilot Al Buchert was the advance scout, flying a single-engine airplane over 30 plots of clearcut, swamp and forest. Buchert relayed moose sightings over the radio to Gibbens. The helicopter swooped down toward the moose, sometimes within 15 yards

Keech leaned out of the craft with a rifle much like a .22 and fired a tranquilizer dart. He rarely misses

Within five to seven minutes, the drug brought the moose to its knees. Gibbens landed the helicopter nearby, and Keech and Wolf tromped through the snow to the moose's side to begin their work

Researchers look for many things in the moose samplings. Blood samples can yield evidence that the moose has tried to fight off a brainworm invasion, or has other diseases, or lacks key trace elements or heavy metals. The feces (extracting them by hand is "the glory part of the job," Wolf said) can reveal whether the moose is pregnant or has parasites. The hair contains DNA information, which has already been helpful in busting at least one poacher. And the tooth, like a tree, has rings that reveal the moose's age



Cool retreats
This year, the moose collars will carry a new device - a thermometer to record the temperature in the moose's surroundings. Schrage and DNR wildlife researcher Mark Lenarz said that may help determine whether moose are finding places in the woods - "microclimates" - where they can stay cool enough, winter and summer, to stay healthy. If they can prove that theory, that could lead to forestry and wildlife management efforts to protect and enhance such areas

Lenarz pointed out that global warming, or at least the winter warming in northwestern Minnesota in the past 40 years, can be regarded as a "proximate" cause of increasing moose deaths. That means it's a context that creates the more direct causes or vulnerabilities, much like alcoholism might lead to a person's death from liver failure

Mean midwinter temperatures in northwest Minnesota increased about 11 degrees from 1961-2001, astonishing by most climate change measures; Lenarz said researchers are still examining the trends in the northeast. Schrage said he believes mild winters and longer growing seasons are a threat to the northeast moose, but they don't explain everything

"It's complicated in between a warm climate and a dead moose," he said. "I don't think I'm ever going to walk up to a dead moose and say, `Oh, it died of heat stress.' There's a lot that happens in between."


A test case
Even a dead moose can help the researchers. Last December, a moose stumbling near a highway close to Side Lake was shot by a DNR warden. Two days later the moose was on a table at the Veterinary Diagnostic Lab at the University of Minnesota's St. Paul campus. A team led by pathologist Dr. Arno Wunsch-mann had scalpels in hand

The necropsy was a rare opportunity to examine a dead moose before predators or decomposition damaged it

The moose appeared fairly healthy, if a bit undernourished for the time of year. Wunsch-mann sliced the moose's brain, spinal cord and pituitary gland into samples that would be further processed into slides for study under a microscope. After looking at 50 slides for three hours over two days, Wunschman had a cause of death: brainworm, a parasite that has passed from deer to moose and burrows through their spinal column and brains. White-tailed deer, however, are largely immune to the damage

End of story? Not quite. Blood sampling of collared Minnesota moose, Lenarz said, has shown that between 16 and 18 percent have been exposed to brainworm. That's less than the annual non-hunting mortality rate, and in any case it doesn't indicate anything about how successfully moose might resist the parasite and its effects

This week's mobilization ended Friday with 34 moose collared, one short of the goal because a radio on one collar didn't work. The samples from the darted moose will take months to analyze. Now that she has a radio collar, Moose 294 will be tracked weekly by the DNR. By all appearances, she's healthy and even a little fat, Keech and Wolf noted in their encounter

Minutes after she pushed off through the thicket of small maple and poplar, Gibbens and two passengers spotted Moose 294 in a clearing, already nearly 300 yards away. Alert to the helicopter overhead, she darted toward cover, high-stepping through the deep snow toward an uncertain future

Bill McAuliffe  - 612-673-7646


The hunt for a hidden killer
WHAT'S KNOWN
- Minnesota has long been the southern extreme of North American moose range

- Wildlife experts expected milder winters to lead to an increase in moose numbers. The opposite has happened

- The northwestern Minnesota moose herd has declined from an estimated 4,000 in the mid-1980s to 84 last year. In the Arrowhead region, the number declined from an estimated 8,400 in 2006 to 6,500 last year

- Non-hunting deaths, including disease, starvation and collisions with vehicles, take more than one-fifth of Minnesota moose each year, about twice the rate in the rest of North America. Reproduction doesn't cover that loss

WHAT'S SUSPECTED
- Heat stress, in both winter and summer, has weakened moose, leaving them vulnerable to disease and parasites, malnutrition and predators

- Moose could be gone from Minnesota by 2050

WHAT'S PUZZLING
- A similar species of moose is expanding its range southward in New England, to the same latitude as Des Moines, Iowa. Despite calls to stabilize the population, expanded hunting seasons haven't stopped the growth

- Moose are also turning up in open, agricultural North Dakota, not regarded as moose country. North Dakota state big-game biologist Bill Jensen said they seem to have a taste for sunflowers

BILL McAULIFFE

Graphic

 
MAP
PHOTO

Load-Date: March 4, 2008


End of Documen
t



Climate change report called `fantasy'; The group appointed by Gov. Pawlenty to offer strategies for reducing greenhouse gases "simply ignored reality" about costs and human behavior, its critics said.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
April 10, 2008 Thursday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2008 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2B
Length: 434 words
Byline: BILL McAULIFFE, STAFF WRITER
Body


A set of 60 recommendations for how Minnesota could achieve significant greenhouse gas reductions in the coming years is "fantasy" that ignores how much it will cost businesses and consumers, according to a group of free marketeers.
The recommendations by the Minnesota Climate Change Advisory Group, a panel of business and community leaders appointed by Gov. Tim Pawlenty last year to develop strategies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, are based on inadequate economic research and flawed assumptions about behavior, the critics said.
"They simply ignored reality," said David Strom, president of the Minnesota Free Markets Institute and former president of the Taxpayers League of Minnesota. Strom was joined at a Capitol news conference Wednesday by Rep. Mike Beard, R-Shakopee; Sen. David Hann, R-Eden Prairie; Linda Runberck, development director of the American Property Coalition; Burnsville businessman Jim Marchessault, who participated in the climate change advisory group; Jeff Davis, president of Minnesota Majority, and several others.
The group commissioned the Beacon Hill Institute, a Boston-based, small-government economic research group, to study the recommendations. The institute reported that the MCCAG recommendations didn't adequately calculate costs and benefits, allowed for too many uncertainties and is "useless for making any informed policy decisions." The estimated net cost of $726 million by 2025 if the recommendations were enacted "grossly underestimates" their true cost, the review stated.
Beard and others generally said they believed that economic competition, not government mandates, can lead to greenhouse gas reductions, if they are even needed. Greenhouse gases, particularly carbon dioxide, are blamed for global warming.
Edward Garvey, director of the state Office of Energy Security and a coordinator of the climate change advisory panel, said the recommendations are intended to be an ongoing dialogue. As such, they couldn't yield a precise price tag, he said.
Pawlenty's order to the group was to reach various greenhouse gas reduction goals without costing Minnesota jobs or putting the state at an economic disadvantage, Garvey said.
"The charge is to move thoughtfully, deliberately and incrementally, understand and think through what the next steps are with the knowledge you have," Garvey said. "We don't know everything we need to know."
The MCCAG's final report is expected to be posted online for public comment perhaps as early as today at www.mnclimatechange.us/MCCAG.cfm. The deadline for public comments is April 18.
Bill McAuliffe - 612-673-7646

Load-Date: April 15, 2008


End of Documen
t



How Minnesotans should think about energy in the age of Fukushima and climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
April 24, 2011 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2011 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1OP
Length: 824 words
Byline: JAMES P. LENFESTEY, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


The as-yet-unresolved catastrophe at the Fukushima nuclear power stations in Japan should raise further alarms about nuclear power in Minnesota and elsewhere. Germany and several other countries have decided to pause, if not roll back, their nuclear plans. But Germany already obtains 17 percent of its power from renewable, danger-free alternatives like solar and wind. Minnesota, now the fourth-leading wind power state (about 11 percent of its power), has vast untapped wind and solar potential ahead of it.
Minnesotans may not remember that the pulse for state wind power development did not come from the state's utility industry but from an organized base of alternative-energy supporters and legislators who in 1994 pushed Xcel Energy (then Northern States Power) to agree to produce 435 megawatts from nonpolluting sources in return for permission to add interim dry cask storage of high-level radioactive waste on the nuclear site at Prairie Island on the Mississippi River. Today those "interim" casks seem permanent, as the nation has absolutely no plan for long-term isolated storage. The good news: Wind power is also here to stay.
As we all know now, the four Fukushima power stations suffered a major earthquake, which they probably survived, followed by a massive tsunami, which they did not. The remnants of those power stations, like the exploded power station at Chernobyl in the Ukraine, will be a liability for humanity into the unknowable future. Ukraine is today seeking donors of $1.1 billion to construct a new sarcophagus over the melting reactor, since the old one leaks badly. It wants some of that money to come from you and me, because the government that built the reactor, the Soviet Union, no longer exists.
Could a major accident happen in Minnesota? Unlikely, but a fresh state review of nuclear power safety should look at the possibility of thousand-year natural events such as crippled Fukushima, not 100- or 500-year events (formerly the design standard). This is probably not a problem. The Upper Midwest appears out of the range of seismic activity of the New Madrid fault in Missouri, site of the massive New Madrid earthquake in 1812. But, under what currently unforeseen circumstance could the Mississippi River flood much higher than historic levels, affecting the plants in its flood plain? Preventive measures must be equal to such potential, as the otherwise careful plans at Fukushima tragically were not.
Meanwhile, the Minnesota Legislature has rushed through two laws -- one that repeals the state's longstanding ban on new nuclear power facilities, and another that repeals a ban on new coal-fueled power plants. Because of the unfolding calamity of climate change, I have strongly supported the nuke plant ban repeal. After Fukushima, I still do if Xcel can demonstrate proper precautions against potentially epic flood events. Citizens should know, however, that new nuclear power stations are probably prohibitively expensive. One of the most highly touted new reactor designs, under construction in Finland, is twice over its initial budget, with no end in sight. Even counting large federal subsidies urged by Republicans and agreed to by President Obama, plus federal insurance guarantees, any new plant is highly unlikely in Minnesota.
The second bill repealing a ban on new coal-fired power plants should be vetoed. Pollution from burning coal is a major contributor to climate change, the effects of which are already around us, meaning coal must be eliminated as a power source in the foreseeable future. Even if sequestration of waste carbon dioxide proves a viable technology, Minnesota is not a suitable candidate.
Meanwhile, the state's pollution-free wind and solar resources have barely begun to be tapped. Germany, six degrees of latitude farther north than Minnesota and with far fewer clear days, has achieved a greater percent of its power from pollution-free resources because of favorable feed-in tariffs, empowering citizens to install clean green power and be gainfully compensated, creating a large, reliable distributed power system using the roofs of existing factories and houses.
Germany is no doubt worried about Russia, its unpredictable energy supplier. Americans and Minnesotans should be much more worried than they appear to be about their continuous trillion-dollar oil wars and unreliable suppliers in the Persian Gulf region.
Gov. Mark Dayton should veto the lifting of the coal moratorium, a terribly shortsighted policy. And veto the repeal of the nuclear ban unless Xcel presents a credible plan to cover heretofore unforeseen flood events. If it does, Dayton should let Minnesota nukes go forward, in the unlikely event that private investors will ever be found to support it. Repealing the effects of climate change and oil wars is the higher priority.
James P. Lenfestey is a former editorial writer for the Star Tribune, specializing in energy and education.

Load-Date: April 25, 2011


End of Documen
t



St. Croix art and science exhibit shows potential impact of climate change
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 21, 2013 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2013 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3N
Length: 538 words
Byline: KEVIN GILES; JIM ANDERSON; STAFF WRITERS, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


Challenges and potential impacts of climate change will be illustrated in an exhibit at the St. Croix River Visitor Center in St. Croix Falls, Wis.: "Legacies and Paradise Lost? Climate Change in the Northwoods and Beyond."
The exhibit features art and science through painting, sculpture and poetry. It will be available for viewing from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. daily through Oct. 5.
In conjunction with the exhibit, a special program on the impact of climate change on brook trout will take place on Aug. 1 at 7 p.m. The presentation will focus on the search for strategies for protecting and restoring habitat for brook trout and other native species in the Namekagon River. Patrick Shirey, a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Notre Dame, will provide perspectives from ecology, history and law during his talk.
The St. Croix River Visitor Center is situated at 401 N. Hamilton St. in St. Croix Falls. Admission is free.
Franconia
Hot Metal Pour coming on Aug. 3
Franconia Sculpture Park will host its annual Community Collaboration Hot Metal Pour on Aug. 3 from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
The event includes both the chance to watch professional sculptors creating metal art and for visitors to create cast iron sculptures.
It will be led by artists Tamsie Ringler, professor at St. Catherine University, and Kristy Summers, professor at Southern Illinois University Carbondale.
Eleven iron artists and four iron artist interns also will participate. Performances by the contemporary "found object" percussion band, Savage Aural Hotbed, are scheduled at 12:30 p.m., 2:30 p.m. and 4 p.m.
Preceding the event, attendees can go to one of four free community workshops for mold-making: July 27 and 28 from 1-4 p.m., and July 31 and Aug. 1 from 4-8 p.m. Mold prices are $25, $40 and $75, depending on size. For more information, e-mail info@franconia.org, or call 651-257-6668.
Franconia Sculpture Park, situated just north of Washington County's border with Chisago County on Hwy. 95, is an arts organization for emerging and established artists. The free park has a collection of more than 75 contemporary sculptures and is open to the public 365 days a year.
Woodbury
Golf course hosts youth fundraiser
Eagle Valley Golf Course, in conjunction with The First Tee, will be hosting a fundraising event on Aug. 2.
The golf event will begin at noon and a dinner and program will follow at 5 p.m. All proceeds will go toward The First Tee program to help with local youth development.
Registration includes 18 holes of golf, cart rental, dinner and a program, plus on-course activities and prizes.
Register before July 22 for $125 per player, or $150 per player between July 23 and July 29. Questions can be directed to Dan Moris, golf operations manager, at 651-714-3753 or djmoris@ci.woodbury.mn.us
Afton
Attention beginners: Learn geocaching
A Geocaching 101 course will be taught from 10 to 11:30 a.m. on July 27 at Afton State Park, 6959 Peller Av. S., in southern Washington County.
Participants will use a GPS unit to find hidden treasures. This is a program designed for beginners, who will receive hands-on training.
Participants can bring their own GPS units or use one belonging to the park.
For more information, call 651-436-5391.
KEVIN GILES, JIM ANDERSON

Load-Date: July 24, 2013


End of Documen
t



What do politics hold for climate change?
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
November 8, 2012 Thursday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2012 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4B
Length: 440 words
Byline: BILL McAULIFFE; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Some praise quiet but significant progress by Obama.


Body


When President Obama referred to "the destructive power of a warming planet" in his victory speech Tuesday night, the words caught Jonathan Foley by surprise.
It wasn't because Foley, director of the University of Minnesota's Institute on the Environment, shares the view that Obama has shrunk from the issue of climate change during his first term.
Rather, Foley said that Obama has made remarkable progress on climate change initiatives, but that with the economy under a brighter political spotlight, "he couldn't talk about it."
"I hope it frees his hand to talk about the issue more," Foley said of Obama's election to a second and final term, which could reduce the restrictions that can come with eyeing re-election. "I think he sent the environmental community a big message. Maybe now that the election is over with, he can broaden the palette of issues."
This past year, Obama has overseen a mandate to increase the average gas mileage of new cars and light trucks sold in the United States to 54.5 miles per gallon by 2025. It's currently 29 mpg. That is "the biggest single step the U.S. has taken to date to reduce carbon pollution," said J. Drake Hamilton, science policy director for Fresh Energy, a St. Paul-based renewable energy advocacy group.
Hamilton said pending standards that would set limits on carbon emissions from new coal plants -- even though few are being built -- are another significant step by the Obama administration.
With a gain of two Democratic seats in the U.S. Senate, and wins by climate-sensitive candidates including Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin, Obama may find more interest in legislation focusing on links between carbon emissions and threats to the economy and public health, as well as to expensive damages from severe storms, Hamilton added. However, he may also find opposition in the House, whose Republican majority just before the election recess passed a bill called the "Stop the War on Coal Act" aimed at blocking the coal-plant emissions standards. Voters re-elected a Republican House majority Tuesday.
Foley said Obama "deserves a pat on the back" for tying the auto industry bailout to the high fuel-efficiency standards. His strategy for the next four years, in the face of likely Republican opposition, Foley said, will probably involve relatively small rule-making through agencies such as the Environmental Protection Agency, rather than broad, high-profile efforts such as the failed bid to establish a cap-and-trade market for carbon emissions.
"A thousand little initiatives in government that add up: Maybe that's the way to get things done," Foley said.
Bill McAuliffe - 612-673-7646

Load-Date: November 8, 2012


End of Documen
t



Mpls. wins feather in its climate change cap
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
December 4, 2014 Thursday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2014 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2B
Length: 227 words
Byline: ERIN GOLDEN; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: City among those being honored by White House.


Body


Minneapolis' efforts to combat climate change have helped put it on a White House list of national leaders on the issue.
The White House said Wednesday that Minneapolis is one of 16 "Climate Action Champions" selected in a competitive process. Each of the communities will receive assistance from a coordinator, who will help provide information and guidance on funding, among other support. The designation does not come with direct funding.
The announcement from the White House noted the city's work on its Climate Action Plan, which includes specific targets for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.
Those targets are a reduction of 15 percent by 2015, 30 percent by 2025 and 80 percent by 2050.
It also pointed to the city's new partnerships with Xcel Energy and CenterPoint Energy to plan and market strategies to help the city meet its goals.
The other communities on the White House list are: the Blue Lake Rancheria Tribe in California; Boston; Broward County, Fla.; Dubuque, Iowa; Knoxville, Tenn.; the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments; the Mid-America Regional Council in Kansas City, Kan., and Kansas City, Mo.; Oberlin, Ohio; Portland, Ore.; Salt Lake City; San Francisco; the Sault Ste. Marie Tribe of Chippewa in Michigan; Seattle, and the Sonoma County Regional Climate Protection Authority in California.
Erin Golden · 612-673-4790

Load-Date: December 4, 2014


End of Documen
t



Minneapolis puts its money behind efforts to fight climate change; With 20 grants of $1,000 each, the city is thinking globally and acting locally to promote ways to help residents use less energy.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
June 5, 2007 Tuesday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3B
Length: 527 words
Byline: Tom Meersman, Staff Writer
Body


With $1,000, Mark Hinds thinks he can do something about global warming - at least in his part of the world, the Lyndale neighborhood in south Minneapolis, where Hinds would use the money to help some of its 8,000 residents use less energy.
The city has 20 such grants to distribute to grass-roots groups, and Hinds was one of a dozen neighborhood and church leaders who met Monday afternoon to learn more about the program.
They heard Gayle Prest, the city's manager of sustainability, explain that global warming is caused in part by carbon dioxide emissions and that citizens can help slow the problem by modifying how they light and heat their homes, and travel to work or school.
"Everyone's talking about climate change, but really getting to the individual level is much more difficult," she said. "Our goal is not just to educate residents, but to actually help them to make meaningful changes."
The best way, Prest said, is for citizens to educate their neighbors, so the grants will be available to organizations such as neighborhood associations, churches, business groups, schools, libraries, park and recreation centers, and other nonprofit organizations.
Prest hopes that groups will submit ideas that haven't been tried before or think of new ways to, say, get energy-efficient thermostats, low-flow showerheads and compact fluorescent lights into more homes, apartments and businesses.
Hinds, executive director of the Lyndale Neighborhood Association, said he'll submit a proposal to help landlords as well as residents because too many buildings in his area waste too much energy.
Neighborhood groups and congregations are already working on those issues, but even small sums of money will help immensely, said Sean Gosiewski, executive director of the Alliance for Sustainability, a nonprofit group that specializes in energy conservation.
Neighbors in block clubs are talking to one another about bike lanes available for commuting, and holding energy fairs with door prizes to increase attendance, he said. And many congregations are urging members to sign up for the Minnesota Energy Challenge, which has a website that allows people to calculate how much money they can save - and how much less carbon dioxide they'd produce - by consuming less electricity and gasoline.
Prest said the $1,000 grants could be used for energy-saving materials and supplies as well as printing, distribution, salaries and other outreach expenses, including programs to educate non-English speakers about ways to save energy. Prest said five similar grants of up to $10,000 each will be available for larger projects.
Tom Meersman - 612-673-7388
ABOUT THE GRANTS
The city has 20 climate-change grants to distribute. Money for them comes from the city's general budget.
The grants will be available to organizations through which Minneapolis residents interact with their peers: neighborhood associations, churches, business groups, schools, libraries, park and recreation centers, and other nonprofit organizations.
More information online: Eligibility requirements, application forms and other information are available at www.ci.minneapolis.mn.us/sustainability/index.asp.

Load-Date: June 5, 2007


End of Documen
t



Panel tells DNR moose hunting should be allowed; It also acknowledged long-term threat of climate change.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
August 19, 2009 Wednesday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2009 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4B
Length: 382 words
Byline: BOB VON STERNBERG, STAFF WRITER
Body


Minnesota's moose may be in trouble, but they can still be hunted.
Despite fears that the population is crashing, a special committee reporting to the Department of Natural Resources recommended Tuesday that the population will hold its own "for the foreseeable future."
And despite the threat to the species posed by what the committee called "the long-term threat" of climate change, it recommended that moose hunting continue in the northeastern part of the state.
The committee was formed, in part, because moose numbers have declined dramatically in northwestern Minnesota during the past two decades and appear to be dropping in northeast Minnesota.
Earlier this year, the DNR reported that the 2008 survey of the animals found a statewide population of about 7,600 animals.
While that's little changed from a year earlier, several secondary factors point to a continued overall decline in the number of moose the agency reported.
That decline can be traced to low calf survival rates, a decline in hunter kills and a rise in natural mortality.
Regarding a continued moose hunt, the committee recommended that harvest and population data must be monitored in order to know when banning it would be necessary.
In addition, white-tailed deer should be managed at low densities in the northeastern moose range to reduce the deer's parasite-related effects on moose.
According to the committee, white-tailed deer at a density of fewer than 10 per square mile "would reduce the potential for parasite-mediated impacts on moose."
Committee chairman Rolf Peterson said committee members recognize climate change as a clear long-term threat to moose in Minnesota but weren't able to quantify the extent of the threat during the next half-century.
Committee members did recommend listing moose as a state-designated threatened or endangered species. But a majority of committee members who voted believe the moose should be identified as a "species of special concern."
That, according to the committee, is "a designation that would more accurately reflect the animal's vulnerable status. This designation is advisory and conveys no additional legal status."
The report isn't binding on department officials, but they will review it as they draft a new state moose management plan.
Bob von Sternberg - 612-673-7184

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: August 20, 2009


End of Documen
t



Student finds signs of climate change in ice; A science fair project on Bayfield harbor shows the ice season there has shrunk.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
April 7, 2009 Tuesday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2009 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 820 words
Byline: TOM MEERSMAN, STAFF WRITER
Body


What started as a high school science fair project is the latest piece of evidence that global warming is affecting Lake Superior.
Forrest Howk, now a freshman at the University of Wisconsin in Madison, studied 150 years of data in his hometown of Bayfield, Wis., and found that the harbor's frozen season has shrunk from about 120 days to 80 days.
The findings, published in the latest issue of Journal of Great Lakes Research, are consistent with recent studies showing that maximum ice cover in the Great Lakes has decreased slowly but steadily over the years.
"You hear about all these clues to global warming having to do with ice, and you think about just putting it in your back yard, which for me is Lake Superior," Howk said.
Howk studied Bayfield harbor, a popular summer destination for Minnesotans, to see how many days each winter it is locked in ice. For much of the year, ferries cross the 2 miles between Bayfield and Madeline Island, but they must stop each winter when harbor ice grows more than 6 inches thick.
His main sources of information were ferry boat records, the local newspaper and early settler accounts. By compiling the records from 1857 to 2007, Howk discovered that 150 years ago the ferries usually stopped around Dec. 20 and began about April 20. Now the ferries typically stop the second week of January, and start again in late March.
Three of the four warmest winters on record have occurred since 1997, Howk said. Bayfield's harbor was closed to navigation for only 11 days in 2006, seven days in 2002 and for no days at all in 1998, according to Howk and records from Madeline Island Ferry Line.
What ferries can tell us
Howk's study and others reinforce what people at the Ferry Line are noticing.
"Climate change is real," said Robin Trinko-Russell, vice president of finance for the company. "We can see it here."
However, this winter has been colder than usual, Trinko-Russell said. The ferries stopped running Jan. 1, a week or two earlier than usual, and resumed last weekend.
Howk acknowledges that one reason for the shorter ice season might be that diesel ferries with steel hulls can plow through thin ice more easily than the wooden hulled fishing vessels of a century ago.
But boat technology alone cannot explain the trend, he said. Ferries have been using the same type of boats since the 1960s, he said, and the pattern of shorter ice seasons has been clear and has even accelerated since 1975.
Howk knows that his study by itself does not prove that climate change is occurring, but it's consistent with research by scientists.
Scientists see thin ice
Researchers at the Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory in Ann Arbor, Mich., have used satellites, ships, planes and shore measurements in the United States and Canada to chronicle declining ice on Superior and other Great Lakes during the past three decades.
The average maximum ice cover for all the Great Lakes shrank by about 15 percent between 1973 and 2009, said Jia Wang, an ice climatologist at the lab. Lake Superior has lost about 20 percent.
The Superior estimate includes this winter, he said, which was colder than in recent years and resulted in about 91 percent of Superior's surface being frozen at its peak on March 2. The lab is part of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
"You're going to find a lot of year-to-year variability in terms of maximum ice extent, but the overall trend is downward," said George Leshkevich, a physical scientist at the lab. "Air and water temperatures are going up, and ice cover is going down because the water can absorb more heat and hold it longer," he said.
Leshkevich cruised through parts of Lake Superior in a Coast Guard icebreaker two weeks ago and found that ice in the middle of the lake was weaker, thinner and less dense than the last time most of the lake froze in 1997.
If the trend of later freezing and earlier melting continues, said Leshkevich, it could feed upon itself. Less ice on a lake means more water will evaporate in winter. It also means less sun will be reflected, and water temperatures will continue to increase.
That could lengthen the shipping season, Leshkevich said, but it could also reduce the amount of cargo ships can move through locks and other shallow areas of the lakes. More open water also could increase wave action and erosion rates, he said, and spoil winter spawning habitat for fish.
Howk is focused more on choosing a major and attending class than harbor ice these days. But he's proud that his Bayfield science fair project won third place award in an international competition last year and has been published.
"Doing the research was always kind of a mixed feeling," Howk said. "You're doing this in the place you live and love, but at the same time the results are not very positive. But I felt confident about my values and my data, and there's just no way of changing that."
Tom Meersman - 612-673-7388

Graphic

 
MAP
PHOTO

Load-Date: April 9, 2009


End of Documen
t



Celebrating Minnesota
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 11, 2020 Sunday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2020 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: VARIETY; Pg. 5E
Length: 1561 words
Byline: RICK NELSON; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Author Patrice Johnson gets personal with recipes that highlight the state's food traditions.


Body


"I am a Minnesotan, born with appetite for food and life."
With those words, Patrice Johnson opens her "Land of 10,000 Plates: Stories and Recipes From Minnesota" (Minnesota Historical Society Press, $24.95), a just-released collection of essays and recipes that focus on the multicultural food rituals celebrated across the state as well as in Johnson's own kitchen.
In a recent phone conversation, Johnson, the author of "Jul: Swedish American Holiday Traditions," discussed Tater Tot hot dish, wild rice, climate change and her passion for church cookbooks.
Q: This book is a big change from your Nordic foodways work. Why the switch?
A: Minnesota is my first love. When I've done the Nordic stuff, that's all about my cultural history and how I connect with my family. But Minnesota, it's more than culture, it's my people. Minnesota means so much to me. Living here is such a blessing.
Q: Isn't every place special, in its own way? Floridians probably feel that way about Florida, for example.
A: I suppose, if you live there. I've lived somewhere where there wasn't much in the way of changing seasons, and it was so boring. You can't appreciate a 90-degree day if you also don't have 30 below. We have grasslands, hills, rivers and lakes, and we have all the good food, too.
Q: It's refreshing to see a cookbook that addresses the effects of climate change. Why did that important topic make it into your book?
A: Climate change is such a huge issue for me. Minnesotans - unless they're farmers - probably don't realize how close we are to losing what we take for granted. That thought triggered, "Gosh, I've got to document some of this stuff," because I didn't realize that so much of it was going away. I want people to be grateful for what we have, and keep Minnesota as clean as we can, and keep it cold.
Q: Are Minnesotans' culinary habits ruled by seasonal rituals?
A: I wish we were, because there is so much celebration in that. Everything is available now. You can get a strawberry in January, although it's not a good strawberry. In the old days, you could only get a strawberry in June and July. In my house, yes, we are absolutely ruled by the seasons, because it's best to eat things when they're at their peak. But if you're a family with four rowdy kids and a heavy schedule, do you even have time to think about the seasons? Or is it just about getting dinner on the table as quickly as possible?
Q: On the subject of dinner, you've got four Tater Tot hot dish recipes in the book. What is it with you - and Minnesota - and Tater Tot hot dish?
A: I have to admit that I don't make a lot of hot dish, and it wasn't until I started writing this book that I really dove back into the hot dish realm. Then I judged the Minnesota congressional delegation hot dish competition, and, I mean, come on, that's amazing.
Q: Do you have a favorite among the four recipes?
A: I have to say that Rep. Ilhan Omar's hot dish is so delicious. Don't tell Yia [Vang, chef/owner of Union Hmong Kitchen] that it's my favorite one, because his is really good, too; it's the one that he first served to the public at the State Fair. But Rep. Omar's is actually relatively healthy, as hot dish goes.
Q: The most traditional hot dish recipe in your book embraces the "no-can" concept. Why?
A: I hate it that I'm such a snob in this way, but I just can't do it when it comes to canned soup. There have been times when I've had to buy it, and I go to a store where they don't know me. Isn't that awful? For me, it's a way to control what goes into hot dish - the salt, for example - and the no-can alternative tastes better.
Q: How did you develop your Spam-topped lefse pizza?
A: I'm pretty sure that I started making lefse pizza because I was inspired by something I ate at Aquavit [the former Minneapolis restaurant], and it was possibly [Aquavit] chef Marcus Samuelsson being inspired by Wolfgang Puck, because it's crisped lefse topped with crème fraîche, pickled vegetables, capers, gravlax and caviar. I was demonstrating at the State Fair, and I like to challenge people, because Minnesotans have a reputation of not eating outside the box. So I decided to replace the gravlax with Spam, and fancy it up with roe. People were skeptical, but then they were, like, "This is the best Spam I've ever had."
Q: Your work is usually focused on other people's histories, so what was it like to write about yours?
A: Easy. Too easy, really. When I first pitched this book, it felt so unfocused. I've got too much to say, and growing up in a family of four older sisters and a mom who is super-vivacious, well, there is never a quiet moment when we're together. I felt like I had to find a way to have myself heard. There are too many stories, and not enough ears. Plus, I loved growing up in my family, so it's very easy to tell those stories.
Q: The book has a recipe for a shrimp-mayonnaise-shredded carrot-potato sticks salad and it's named for Jan Doerr. Who is Jan Doerr?
A: She was our neighbor. That salad is fantastic. I realize it's probably an acquired taste, but it's so Minnesotan, it's the salad equivalent of hot dish. I mean, whoever thought to put a funny shaped potato chip with carrots, shrimp and mayonnaise - or, in my mother's case, Miracle Whip - in a bowl and call it dinner? It has crunchy, and sweet, and creamy, but you really need to eat it with biscuits, pickles, baked beans and colby cheese.
Q: That recipe has to be a church cookbook classic, right? What's the origin of your vintage church cookbook fixation?
A: It's because it's about forgotten voices, and that's so fascinating to me. We see a lot of women's history in those old church and community cookbooks.
Q: How big is your collection?
A: Maybe a couple of hundred, and I'm always looking for more. Shoes and books, whoever dies with the most wins.
Q: Connecting with a woman named Hope Flanagan at a wild rice festival is the book's final essay. Why did you end it this way?
A: I wanted to have some hope, and meeting a woman named Hope, who happens to be Native, felt like the right note. Even when things are dire, she has a way of lifting up above it, and I find that helpful and hopeful. Chef Yia, he has that same tone. These two really made me feel hopeful. They taught me that there is something that each of us as individuals can do in our community.
Rick Nelson · @RickNelsonStrib
'Meet' the author
What: Patrice Johnson is offering a virtual cooking tutorial, demonstrating a Minnesota hot dish recipe along with a Swedish classic, Flygande Jakob.
When: Oct. 28, 6:30-8 p.m.
Where: Via Zoom and hosted by the American Swedish Institute.
Cost: $25 ($20 for ASI members), asimn.org.
No-Can Tater Tot Hot Dish
Serves 9 to 12.
Note: From "Land of 10,000 Plates" by Patrice Johnson.
For sauce:
· 2 tbsp. butter
· 2 tbsp. flour
· 1 tbsp. Dijon-style mustard
· 2 c. whole milk, just warm
· 1 c. shredded Monterey Jack cheese
· Pinch of freshly ground nutmeg
· 01/2 tsp. freshly ground black pepper
For filling:
· 1 tbsp. butter
· 10 oz. mushrooms, chopped
· 1 medium white or yellow onion, chopped (about 1 c.)
· 1 lb. lean ground beef or turkey
· 1 tsp. fresh thyme
· 2 medium zucchini, chopped (about 2 c.)
· 2 tbsp. tomato paste
· Salt and freshly ground black pepper
For topping:
· Butter for baking dish
· 1 lb. frozen Tater Tots
· 01/2 c. shredded Monterey Jack cheese
Directions
To prepare sauce: In a medium saucepan over medium heat, combine butter and flour and whisk constantly as butter melts and blends with flour. Add mustard and continue whisking for 3 to 5 minutes. Slowly whisk in milk until mixture is completely blended. Remove from heat and stir in 1 cup Monterey Jack cheese, nutmeg and 01/2 teaspoon black pepper.
To prepare filling: In a large skillet over medium-high heat, melt butter. Add mushrooms and onions and cook until the mushrooms begin to release their liquid and the onions are soft and translucent, about 5 to 7 minutes. Make space in the middle of the skillet, add the ground beef (or turkey) and cook, stirring, for about 8 to 10 minutes, using a spoon or spatula to break up the meat and combine with the mushrooms and onions. Add thyme, zucchini and tomato paste, mix well and cook an additional 2 minutes. Season with salt and pepper to taste.
To assemble: Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Generously grease bottom and sides of 9-by-13-inch (3-quart) casserole dish with butter.
Spread the filling evenly in the baking dish and top with all but 01/2 cup of the sauce. Top evenly with Tater Tots, reserved 01/2 cup sauce and 01/2 cup Monterey Jack cheese. Cover with aluminum foil and bake for 30 minutes. Remove foil and continue baking until cheese is melted and golden, about 20 minutes. Remove from oven and let hot dish stand for 10 minutes before serving.
Sort-of Jan Doerr's Shrimp and Carrot Salad
Serves 6.
Note: From "Land of 10,000 Plates," by Patrice Johnson.
· 03/4 c. mayonnaise
· 3 tbsp. sugar
· 3 tbsp. freshly squeezed lemon juice
· 1 tbsp. prepared mustard
· 1 tsp. Old Bay seasoning
· Freshly ground black pepper, to taste
· 4 c. shredded carrots
· 2 large green onions, finely chopped (about 3 to 4 tbsp.)
· 2 c. cooked shrimp
· 1 c. potato sticks
Directions
In a medium bowl, whisk together mayonnaise, sugar, lemon juice, mustard and Old Bay seasoning, then season with pepper, to taste. Combine with carrots, green onions and shrimp. Refrigerate until ready to serve. Garnish with potato sticks.

Load-Date: October 12, 2020


End of Documen
t



As climate changes, this may be the place to live
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
June 25, 2011 Saturday, METRO EDITION


Copyright 2011 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2B
Length: 136 words
Byline: JOSEPHINE MARCOTTY; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


Minneapolis is in the top five among cities deemed most likely to adapt to climate change, according to the environmental advocacy website Grist.
The ranking came Friday from Jeff Opperman, the Nature Conservancy's guru on sustainable hydropower.
The top five cities in order of adaptability are: Cleveland, Milwaukee, Detroit, Chicago and Minneapolis.
"They have a sustainable water supply (in four of the cities, the Great Lakes); their heat stress rankings are relatively low; and they are less vulnerable to natural disasters that will be exacerbated by climate change, such as floods, landslides and wildfires," Opperman said.
The five most vulnerable cities, he said, are Phoenix, Houston, Sacramento, Las Vegas and Miami.
JOSEPHINE MARCOTTY
For more information, see the True North blog at startribune.com/local/blogs.

Load-Date: June 27, 2011


End of Documen
t



Climate change group avoids larger issues; Although some regulations will have real impact.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
February 4, 2008 Monday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2008 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 466 words
Body


The world may be facing a crisis in global climate change, as Gov. Tim Pawlenty says, but the plan issued Friday by the governor's Minnesota Climate Change Advisory Group passes on the hard questions, asking that the state "encourage" and "support" initiatives when a crisis might demand requirements and mandates. Under a crisis, one might expect decisive action. With these recommendations, what Minnesota has is crisis management through incrementalism.
Some recommendations will have real impact, such as supporting standards for energy efficiency in appliances and making sure that utilities have incentives to help consumers conserve energy. The most robust recommendations came on the supply side of the energy equation, repealing the state's moratorium on new nuclear energy facilities and calling for the implementation of the state's renewable energy standard.
But on the conservation side of the equation, the recommendations turned soft. For instance, under the cap-and-trade program for carbon emissions, the advisory group made no recommendations on whether allowances to emit carbon should be given away to existing polluters or if the allowances should be auctioned off to the highest bidder.
Giving away the carbon allowances would punish those companies that have already taken steps to reduce emissions, while high polluters object to auctioning off the carbon allowances, arguing that it would impose an unreasonable burden that would simply be passed on to consumers. Friday's preliminary report was silent on the issue. Just over half of the 51-member advisory group had ties to the energy-producing industry or industries that consume large amounts of energy, and they were enough to block any recommendations that would have imposed any substantive burden on, well, anyone.
Rather, the report seemed to go out of its way to avoid offense. For example, the report recommends that new state and local government buildings have zero net energy loss, a recommendation that is made reachable by new engineering technologies and architectural designs.
However, the recommendations for the much larger segment of new buildings, from the private sector, have much softer language, asking that the state "encourage," "promote" and "support" energy efficiency. On the political right, many don't see the crisis that Pawlenty says he sees, and those who say they do won't back actions that might impose significant costs.
On the political left, liberals see the same crisis as Pawlenty says he does, but want action commensurate to a crisis. Our political process suppresses large movements in any policy area, and environmental policy is no different. Friday's report picks the low-hanging fruit on reducing greenhouse gasses, leaving the more difficult policy challenges for another day.

Load-Date: February 7, 2008


End of Documen
t



North Branch legislator named to White House climate change group
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 1, 2009 Thursday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2009 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6B
Length: 112 words
Byline: Bob von Sternberg, Staff Writer
Body


The Obama administration has tapped a low-profile legislator from North Branch to lead a newly formed coalition on energy and climate change legislation.
Two-term DFL Rep. Jeremy Kalin will head the White House Working Group, an organization of about 40 state legislators from across the country, to push for passage of climate-change legislation in Congress.
Working with Cabinet members and White House staffers, members of the group hope to provide a push for the bills, which have stalled as Congress wrestles with a health care overhaul.
Kalin, who discussed the organization's efforts Wednesday at the Capitol, said he hopes to focus its efforts on clean-energy job growth.

Load-Date: October 2, 2009


End of Document
